PLAIN ENGLISH DESCRIPTION:

The following plain English description of the License is for illustrative
purposes only.  

The text below "The Rampart Source Available License" is the
controlling and binding agreement.

The license described below applies solely to the use of the "rampart-sql.so"
module and the accompanying Texis Library and utilities.  This includes
loading of the module via "require('rampart-sql')", the "tsql", "addtable",
"kdbfchk", "rex" and "metamorph" executables.

The other portions of Rampart, including the main "rampart" executable and
the other accompanying modules are licensed under various permissive open
source licenses.

There are three basic licenses you may choose from:

1)  A Maker's License: Non commercial and student/instructor use. Free of charge.

2)  A Mom and Pop License: Meant for small for-profit organizations or for
    larger organizations to sample the Software. It is limited to a single
    computer running the Software on no more than 4 Cores. Also 
    free of charge.

3)  A Full Commercial License.  Details of cost per CPU Core are available
    on our website at https://rampart.dev/ .

Note that we require that your usage under the two free licenses do not
compete with our company or the services it provides.

Note also that although the source of the Texis Library is available, any
changes made to said source may be used internally by you or your
organization only. Distribution of changes are not allowed.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

BEGIN LICENSE

The Rampart Source Available License.

This License applies to the Texis Library, utilities in binary compiled form
(as linked in the "rampart-sql.so" module or available as separate
executables) as well as the related source code.  Such code includes, but is
not limited to, loading of the module via "require('rampart-sql')", the
"tsql", "addtable", "kdbfchk", "rex" and "metamorph" executables.

This Agreement sets forth the terms on which the Licensors make available
the Software.  BY INSTALLING, DOWNLOADING, ACCESSING, USING OR DISTRIBUTING
ANY OF THE SOFTWARE, YOU AGREE TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS
AGREEMENT.  IF YOU DO NOT AGREE TO SUCH TERMS AND CONDITIONS, YOU MUST NOT
USE THE SOFTWARE.  If you are receiving the Software on behalf of a legal
entity, you represent and warrant that you have the actual authority to
agree to the terms and conditions of this agreement on behalf of such
entity.

1.  License Grant.  Licensors grants you (at your option):

    a.  A Free Non-Commercial License:  This License is based, in part, on the
        PolyForm Noncommercial License (at
        https://polyformproject.org/licenses/noncommercial/1.0.0/).  
        
        i)    The Licensor grants you a copyright license for the Software to do
              everything you might do with the Software that would otherwise
              infringe the licensor’s copyright in it for any permitted
              purpose.  However, you may only distribute the Software according
              to Distribution License and make changes or new works based on
              the Software according to Changes and New Works License.

        ii)   Personal Uses:
              Personal Use for research, experiment, and testing for the
              benefit of public knowledge, personal study, private
              entertainment, hobby projects, amateur pursuits, or religious
              observance, without any anticipated commercial application, is
              Use for a permitted purpose.

        iii)  Noncommercial Organizations:
              Use by any charitable organization, public research
              organization, public safety or health organization, or
              environmental protection organization is Use for a permitted
              purpose regardless of the source of funding or obligations
              resulting from the funding.  Excluded are Uses whose primarily
              intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or
              monetary compensation by the Noncommercial Organization, its
              Affiliates or any third party.

        iv)   Non-Compete: 
              Uses that provide to others any Product that competes with the
              Software or any Product the Licensor or any of its affiliates
              provides using the Software are EXCLUDED as permitted Uses.

        v)    Software as a Service:
              Uses to provide services for third parties that are
              substantially similar to that provided by the Texis Library
              are EXCLUDED as permitted Uses.

        vi)   Educational Uses:
              Use by any educational institution or the instructors and
              students therein for the purposes of instruction, research,
              experiment, and testing for the benefit of public knowledge,
              without any anticipated commercial application, is Use for a
              permitted purpose. Not included in Uses for a permitted
              purpose is use by an educational institution, its instructors
              or students is Infrastructure Use.

        vii)  CPU Core Limitations:  Use on any number of CPU Cores is a
              permitted purpose.

    b.  A Free Limited Commercial License for small business Use or evaluation
        purposes:

        i)    The licensor grants you a copyright license for the Software to do
              everything you might do with the Software that would otherwise
              infringe the licensor’s copyright in it for any permitted
              purpose.  However, you may only distribute the Software according
              to Distribution License and make changes or new works based on
              the Software according to Changes and New Works License.

        ii)   Commercial purposes:
              Any purpose including Uses whose primarily intended for or
              directed toward commercial advantage or monetary compensation
              is a permitted purpose.

        iii)  Non-Compete: 
              Uses that provide to others any Product that competes with the
              Software or any Product the Licensor or any of its affiliates
              provides using the Software are EXCLUDED as permitted Uses.

        iv)   CPU Core Limitation:
              Limited Commercial Use is limited to one CPU per individual or
              Company.  Each CPU may use the Software on a maximum of 4 CPU
              Cores concurrently or simultaneously.

    c.  A Commercial License:          

        i)    The Licensor grants you a copyright license for the Software to do
              everything you might do with the Software that would otherwise
              infringe the licensor’s copyright in it for any permitted
              purpose.  However, you may only distribute the Software according
              to Distribution License and make changes or new works based on
              the Software according to Changes and New Works License.

        ii)   Commercial purposes:
              Any purpose including Uses whose primarily intended for or
              directed toward commercial advantage or monetary compensation
              is a permitted purpose.

        iv)   CPU Core Limitation:
              Commercial Use is limited to the number of CPU Cores as
              purchased and specified in your subscription or purchase
              agreement.  Use of the specified number of Cores is the limit
              of CPU Cores in concurrent, simultaneous Use by the
              Software.

2.  Notices:  You must ensure that anyone who receives a copy of any part of the
    Software from you also receives a plain text copy of these terms.

3.  Distribution License: 
    The licensor grants you an additional copyright license to distribute
    copies of the Software under this license.  Your license to distribute
    covers distributing the Software without changes to the source or 
    binary material.

4.  Changes and New Works License:
    The licensor grants you an additional copyright license to make changes
    and new works based on the Software for internal Use only.  Any changes
    made by you may NOT be distributed under the Distribution license above.

5.  Term of Agreement.  The License will terminate automatically if you fail
    to comply with any of the limitations or other requirements described
    herein.  On the Termination Date, if not operating under a new license,
    you shall cease all Use of the Software and destroy all copies, full or
    partial of the Software.  Under the Commercial License, other
    limitations to the terms of the agreement may be specified in the
    accompanying purchase or subscription agreement.

6.  Ownership Rights.  The Software and related documentation are protected
    by United States copyright laws and international treaties.  Licensors,
    third party component providers and open source component providers own
    and retain all right, title and interest in and to the Software and
    related documentation, including all copyrights, patents, trade secret
    rights, trademarks and other intellectual property rights therein.

7.  Exclusion of Warranties.  THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED TO YOU “AS IS”,
    AND ANY USE BY YOU OF THE SOFTWARE WILL BE AT YOUR SOLE RISK. 
    LICENSORS MAKES NO WARRANTIES RELATING TO THE SOFTWARE AND EXPRESSLY
    DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT
    LIMITATION THOSE OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
    PURPOSE.

8.  Limitation of Liability.  IN NO EVENT SHALL LICENSORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
    INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES WHATSOEVER,
    INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF PROFITS, LOSS OF
    DATA, BUSINESS INTERRUPTION OR ANY OTHER COMMERCIAL DAMAGES OR LOSSES,
    ARISING OUT OF OR RELATED TO YOUR USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE 
    SOFTWARE, HOWEVER CAUSED, REGARDLESS OF THE THEORY OF LIABILITY
    (CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE) AND EVEN IF LICENSORS HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF
    THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

9.  Governing Law.  This Agreement is governed by the law of the State of
    Delaware, U.S.A., without reference to conflict of laws principles.  The
    application of the United Nations Convention of Contracts for the
    International Sale of Goods is expressly excluded.

10. Assignment/Transfers.  You may not assign or transfer this Agreement, in
    whole or in part, without Licensors’ prior written consent, except
    under the terms of this License.  Any other attempted assignment or
    transfer in violation of this Section will be null and void.

11. Third Party Acknowledgements

  a) Aspects of the Software utilize or include third party Software and
     other copyrighted material.  Acknowledgements, licensing terms and
     disclaimers for such material are available for the third party
     Software in the respective source directories and/or documentation, and
     your use of such material is governed by their respective terms.

  b) The Software includes certain Software provided under various Open
     Source licenses.  Open Source Software is distributed WITHOUT ANY
     WARRANTY, without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
     FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

12. Severability.  If any provision of this Agreement is held invalid,
    illegal or unenforceable, the validity, legality and enforceability of
    any of the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall not in any way
    be affected or impaired.

13. Entire Agreement.  With the exception of an accompanying purchase or
    subscription agreement provided by Licensor, this Agreement is the
    entire agreement between you and Licensors concerning the Software and
    all related documentation and supersedes any other prior or
    contemporaneous agreements or communications with respect to the
    Software and related documentation, whether written or oral.

DEFINITIONS: 

*   The Licensor is the individual or entity offering these terms,
    and the Software is the software, binaries and source code the licensor
    makes available under these terms.

*   A Product can be a good or service, or a combination of them.

*   You refers to the individual or entity agreeing to these terms.

*   Company is any legal entity, sole proprietorship, or other kind of
    organization that you work for, plus all its affiliates.

*   CPU Core is an individual processing unit within the Central Processing Unit
    of a computer, server or other computing device.  Limits per CPU Core
    apply to the maximum number of CPU Cores in use at any given time by the
    Software.

*   Affiliates means the other organizations that an organization has control
    over, is under the control of, or is under common control with.

*   Control means an ownership interst the assets of an entity, or the
    power to direct its management and policies by vote, contract, or otherwise. 
    Control can be direct or indirect.

*   Infrastructure Use is any use of a Product by an organization or institution which
    supports administrative or public facing distribution of information.
 
*   Your licenses are all the licenses granted to you for the Software under these terms.

*   Use means anything you do with the Software requiring one of your licenses.

END LICENSE
