The Rampart Source Available License.  Beta version.

The Rampart Source Available License (herein RSAL) is a work in progress. 
It is provided by its authors Moat Crossing Systems, LLC and Thunderstone,
LLC (collectively, the Licensors).  It applies to the rampart-sql modules
and Texis library only (herein Software).

Goals for a Final License:  It is our intention to craft a license (the
Final License) that allows those who are non-profit, not-for-profit,
hobbyists, start-up ventures, home users and others who currently derive no
direct or indirect monetary benefit from the use of our Software to use it
free of charge.  Those persons or entities who use it in products or
services from which they derive income, as well as those who wish to have
technical support for the Software, are expected to purchase a license.

We welcome comments, suggestions and contributions to the Final License. 
Please address comments to license@moatxing.com.

This beta version of the RASL expires 12/31/2021 (herein
Termination Date).  After such time you agree to either:

   a) Discontinue use of all portions of Rampart licensed under the RSAL.

or

   b) Agree to use the software as licensed under the later, Final License
      version of the RASL, if such a license is ever published.

Publication of the Final License is expected to happen before the expiration
of this beta license.  However, in no case may the Software be used under
this license beyond the stated expiration date regardless of whether the
Final License is ever published.

This Agreement sets forth the terms on which the Licensors make available
the Software.  BY INSTALLING, DOWNLOADING, ACCESSING, USING OR DISTRIBUTING
ANY OF THE SOFTWARE, YOU AGREE TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS
AGREEMENT.  IF YOU DO NOT AGREE TO SUCH TERMS AND CONDITIONS, YOU MUST NOT
USE THE SOFTWARE.  If you are receiving the Software on behalf of a legal
entity, you represent and warrant that you have the actual authority to
agree to the terms and conditions of this agreement on behalf of such
entity.

1.  License Grant.  Licensors grants you (at your option, and for a period
of time ending at the Termination Date):

  a) a limited, non-exclusive, non-transferable license to use, for
     evaluation/non-production purposes only, the Licensors Software at no
     charge subject to the terms and restrictions set forth in this License
     Agreement.  You are not permitted to use the Software in any manner
     not expressly authorized by this License.  You acknowledge and agree
     that ownership of the Software and all subsequent copies thereof
     regardless of the form or media are held by Licensors.

      or

  b) use under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License
     version 2.0 (CC BY-NC 2.0) which may be found at 
     https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/legalcode),
     except that where provisions in the CC BY-NC 2.0 conflict with any
     provision in this document, the provisions in this document shall
     control.

2.  Term of Agreement.  Your license is effective until the Termination
    Date.  The License will terminate automatically if you fail to comply
    with any of the limitations or other requirements described herein.  On
    the Termination Date, if not operating under a new license, you shall
    cease all use of the Software and destroy all copies, full or partial of
    the Software.

3.  Ownership Rights.  The Software and related documentation are protected
    by United States copyright laws and international treaties.  Licensors,
    third party component providers and open source component providers own
    and retain all right, title and interest in and to the Software and
    related documentation, including all copyrights, patents, trade secret
    rights, trademarks and other intellectual property rights therein.

4.  Exclusion of Warranties.  THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED TO LICENSEE “AS IS”,
    AND ANY USE BY LICENSEE OF THE SOFTWARE WILL BE AT LICENSEE’S SOLE RISK. 
    LICENSORS MAKES NO WARRANTIES RELATING TO THE SOFTWARE AND EXPRESSLY
    DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT
    LIMITATION THOSE OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
    PURPOSE.

5.  Limitation of Liability.  IN NO EVENT SHALL LICENSORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
    INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES WHATSOEVER,
    INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF PROFITS, LOSS OF
    DATA, BUSINESS INTERRUPTION OR ANY OTHER COMMERCIAL DAMAGES OR LOSSES,
    ARISING OUT OF OR RELATED TO YOUR USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE 
    SOFTWARE, HOWEVER CAUSED, REGARDLESS OF THE THEORY OF LIABILITY
    (CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE) AND EVEN IF LICENSORS HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF
    THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

6.  Governing Law.  This Agreement is governed by the law of the State of
    Delaware, U.S.A., without reference to conflict of laws principles.  The
    application of the United Nations Convention of Contracts for the
    International Sale of Goods is expressly excluded.

7.  Assignment/Transfers.  You may not assign or transfer this Agreement, in
    whole or in part, without Licensors’ prior written consent, except
    under the terms of this License.  Any other attempted assignment or
    transfer in violation of this Section will be null and void.

8. Third Party Acknowledgements

  a) Aspects of the Software utilize or include third party software and
     other copyrighted material.  Acknowledgements, licensing terms and
     disclaimers for such material are available for the third party
     software in the respective source directories, and your use of such
     material is governed by their respective terms.

  b) The Software includes certain software provided under various Open
     Source licenses.  Open Source Software is distributed WITHOUT ANY
     WARRANTY, without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
     FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

9.  Severability.  If any provision of this Agreement is held invalid,
    illegal or unenforceable, the validity, legality and enforceability of
    any of the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall not in any way
    be affected or impaired.

10. Entire Agreement.  This Agreement is the entire agreement between you
    and Licensors concerning the Software and all related documentation and
    supersedes any other prior or contemporaneous agreements or
    communications with respect to the Software and related documentation,
    whether written or oral.
