



ALIEN LIFE-STYLES

There is much more scope for the free play of the imagination when it comes
comes to alien ecology - the business of constructing food chains and equipping
alien beings with the means to secure their food supplies and to reproduce.
Science fiction writers and illustrators have always enjoyed designing cunning
and alarming predators to menace Earthly space-travellers;  such design is much
enlivened by incorporating the monstrous creatures into an exotic but coherent
ecological background.  One of the first writers to do this with appropriate
ingenuity was Stanley G. Weinbaum, and such stories as "The Mad Moon",
"Parasite Planet", and "Flight on Titan" (all 1935) are still unsurpassed in
the sheer delight which they take in devising weird life-systems, though they
are fatally dated in other ways.

The most common variation used by science fiction writers involves attribvting
intelligence (and hence dominance) to non-human creatures.  To imagine that
intelligent humanoids might have evolved from cats rather tahn apes is
relatively straightforward, but certain difficulties stand in the way of the
ever popular lizard-men who figure so frequently as science fictional
villains.  Reptiles, having no internal temperature control, are rather limited
in the amount of brain activity they can indulge in;  the same problem might
limit the possibility of intelligence in cephalopods.  Science fiction writers
occasionally attribute intelligence to viruses or plants, but these exotic
creations are clearly implausible without a good deal of apologetic argument to
explain what they can have developed to substitute for brains, and how the
complexity of their actions is so great as to require intelligent
coordination.

Even conscientious science fiction writers tend to assume that intelligence
would be strongly favored by natural selection in all possible circumstances.
This is not necessarily so:  the vast majority of Earthly organisms are highly
successful and perfectly well adapted to their circumstances without being
conspicuously intelligent and without having anything obvious to gain from
becoming more intelligent.  It remains to be seen whether our intelligence will
guarantee us a longer evolutionary lifetime than worms, flies, snails or
mushrooms, but after studying the form no serious gambler would make us the
favorites.

It seems reasonable to argue that intelligence is only advantageous to certain
kinds of organisms, and therefore goes hand in hand (if the pun may be excused)
with such traits as manipulative ability.  If human beings did not walk
upright, freeing their forelimbs to develop hands instead of paws, they could
not have developed the kind of intelligence they have. Similarly, intelligent
beings must be sociable, because intelligence also arises out of the need to
communicate.  The fact that most mammals and birds show a degree of
intelligence not seen in reptiles is connected with the fact that they
generally have more complicated social relationships, especially in connection
with the rearing of the young.  The more sociable animals are, and the more
able they are to interfere with and transform their own environment, the more
intelligent they are likely to become.  The same principle must be applied to
alien beings:  their intelligence must fit in with the logic of their
situation.

The association of intelligence with communication has led science fiction
writers to imagine a range of peculiar and ingenious communication systems.
Systems of sign language are most popular - for instance, the Asadi in Michael
Bishop's novel, "Transfigurations" communicate by means of rapid color changes
in the irises of their eyes, and their books are plastic disks with central


                                      -1-





lenses which flash out long color sequences.  Even when they do use sound waves
for communication, alien languages are sometimes very different from human ones
- communication by means of musical chord, as in the film "Close Encounters of
the Third Kind" is a familiar variation.

The design of alien life-forms - especially when it come to fitting them into
food chains, and describing methods of reproduction - relies heavily on forms
found within the Earthly life-systems.  The great changes undergone by insects
as they pass through larval and pupal forms to adulthood, has been a constant
source of inspiration. Aliens which undergo a whole series of metamorphoses are
featured in many stories, notably James Blish's "A Case of Conscience," in
which the inhabitants of the planet Lithia recapitulate their evolutionary
history as they develop from egg to adult.

The planet Lithia is also notable for being a well thought out example of the
popular science fiction idea of the big planet.  This is a planet without heavy
metals.  Being less than our own metal heavy Earth, such a planet - if it had
Earthly gravity and therefore Earthly mass - would have to be big, maybe twice
the diameter of our own.  If our own solar system is as represen- tative of
planetary evolution throughout the Galaxy as some scientists believe, such big
planets may be rare or non-existent.  Alien life on these planets would tend
toward the primitive by our standards, as technology would be difficult to
establish without metals. But of course as a substitute ceramics might do
well.

The design of complicated alien reproductive systems is perhaps best
exemplified in the work of Philip Jose Farmer, who has shown a consistent
interest in alien sexual relations.  His story "Mother" features a remarkable
encounter between a human being and an immobile female alien, which relies upon
trapping other creatures to stimulate self-fertilization in much the same way
that many Earthly flowers depend on attracting insects.  The alien mother in
Farmer's story then rears her active young in her uterus-like interior.  The
human protagonist, after initial resistance settles down to a comfortable
lifetime - literally back to the womb.

A life-cycle which is often borrowed by science fiction writers is that of the
ichneumon fly, which lays its eggs in live caterpillars so that when the larvae
hatch they enjoy an abundant supply of fresh meat.  The idea of aliens which
can use human beings in this fashion is a wonderfully horrific one, and
cinematic special effects allow it to be displayed gruesomely in the film
"Alien".  Even at a more elementary level, the notion of alien parasites which
might infest human beings is ready made for melodrama, and analogies with the
myth of Dracula and the idea of demonic possession are frequently invoked.  In
Robert Heinlein's novel "The Puppetmasters", loathesome sluglike creatures
attach them to people, feeding on their bodies and taking control of their
minds.

Though such stories are exciting they are biologically suspect.  Most parasites
are, in fact, rather choosy about the hosts they attack;  parasites and their
hosts tend to evolve together and are co-adapted.  Also, from an ecological
point of view, the most successful parasite is likely to be the most prudent -
the one which inflicts least harm or, where destruction is necessary, behaves
like a sensible conservationist in maintaining its resources.  Arguably, the
really well adapted parasite is one that does not harm its host at all, but
actually provides some return for hospitality. This kind of relationship,
symbiosis, is a notion which has fascinated science fiction writers just as
much as the notion of monstrous alien parasites.



                                      -2-





On Earth there seem to be very few mutually beneficial relationships between
animals (most of the real examples are of plant/animal symbiosis), but science
fiction writers have been relatively generous in scattering such relationships
around on other worlds.  Inevitably science fiction writers have been drawn to
the prospect of symbiotic relationships between human beings and aliens, though
these are biologically suspect for exactly the same reasons that human/alien
parasitism is suspect.  Particularly ingenious are a few stories which suggest
that we are already living unknowingly in parasitic or symbiotic relationships
with alien beings.  In Eric Frank Russell's "Sinister Barrier" people discover
that we are maintained like cattle by invisible alien vampires who feed upon
the energy of our nasty emotions;  while the heroes of Clifford Simak's "Time
and Again" and Bob Shaw's "Palace of Eternity" make the much more comforting
discovery that we live in symbiotic harmony with equally undetectable
energy-beings that provide a secular substitute for souls.

It is understandable that science fiction writers have mainly concentrated, for
dramatic purposes, on one or two species of intelligent alien species at a
time.  There are few attempts in science fiction to describe whole life-systems
with all their complex profusion. Science fiction has not produced - and almost
certainly cannot produce - anything as wonderfully complex and diverse as
Earth's life-system:  the task is impossibly great and would yield little in
the way of dramatic rewards. There are, however, some notable attempts to offer
visions of exotic life-systems which are, by implication, as complex as the one
which produced us.  A most impressive biological phantasmagoria is presented in
Brian Aldiss's "Hothouse", though this is actually a far future Earth, much
changed by evolution, rather than an alien world.  Nothing quite as rich has
been credited to an alien world, but such writers as Poul Anderson and Hal
Clement are always adventurous and conscientious in suggesting complexity and
diversity.  It is not infrequent for writers trying to construct whole
life-systems to get carried away.  They may impute a mystical harmony to the
whole complex of ecological relationships, as in Piers Anthony's "Omnivore" or
the several stories in which whole life-systems are imagined as single
organisms, including the world-spanning network of plant life in Ursula
LeGuin's "Vaster Than Empires and More Slow" and the living planet in Stanislaw
Lem's "Solaris".

Most of the marvelous technologies and miraculous new life-forms imagined in
science fiction's tomorrows are rooted in the knowledge we have today.  But
many science fiction writers resent being pinned down to a drily responsible
examination of actual probabilities.  The laws of natures give them
claustrophobia, seeming as they do to render impossible some of the most
dramatic and interesting scenarios in science fiction.


















                                      -3-

