



A CHAMPION'S SCHOOLING IN ANOTHER WORLD:

Heroes ventured where the mass of humankind dared not tread-into the shifting
shadow worlds that once lay hidden within the solid landscapes of everyday.
The voyages were perilous, but the rewards were great:  On one such journey,
the Irish warrior Cuchulain passed from youth to manhood.

His adventure began as a test:  Cuchulain desired a woman called Emer the Fair,
whose father demanded that he prove himself at the school of the legendary
woman warrior Scathach.  She ruled Alba, a land far beyond the mist and
spindrift of the restless Irish Sea.

With three companions, Cuchulain sailed to Alba's rocky shore.  In days the
companions vanished, seduced away, it was said by magic.  The young Ulster
warrior traveled on alone, heading north until he came to a plain that
stretched to the rim of the sky, where bony mountain ranges loomed. Steaming
and shivering, the plain was bad land;  it seethed with spells. Cuchulain
hesitated, and when he did, a child appeared to him, offering talismans.  If he
wished to find Scathach, said the strange child gravely, he must follow the
talismans.

Cuchulain took them. The first was a wheel, which he cast on the plain.  At
once the wheel glowed gold and of its own rolled off. As the child had advised,
Cuchulain followed, although on either side pitch welled up, black, boiling and
deep enough to trap a man forever.

In the wheel's track he was safe. When the golden disk vanished, Cuchulain
threw the second talisman-a golden apple-and followed as it rolled ahead. On
either side, swaying like grain in the wind, grew glittering knives, sharp
enough to sever a man's legs.  In the apple's track, however, Cuchulain was
untouched and thus passed in safety the outer barriers to Scathach's world.

He left the plain at last and trudged on, ascending steadily into darkening
mountains, until, at dusk he saw the fortress of the woman warrior. Perched on
a cold promontory, the stronghold was embraced by a windy chasm.  The pit was
arched by a narrow bridge.  Encamped on the ledge in front of the bridge were
the youths who would become the Ulsterman's companions in training, the warrior
band of Scathach. They were a fine crew, bright-haired and strong-limbed. They
jeered at him, an unproven stranger.  One shouted to Cuchulain that he should
try the bridge, and that was a trick, for the bridge of its own power could
cast the foolhardy into the chasm below.

Cuchulain leaped onto the span. Like a wave beneath him, the bridge swayed and
buckled;  he felt it snap upward and landed, gasping, back on the ledge.  The
youths jeered the louder. He tried again and once again, and each time, the
bridge tossed him to the ledge amid a chorus of derision.

Cuchulain brightened with rage then, and the hero light blazed aournd his head,
so that his tormentors fell silent. They saw him leap once more into the air,
touch the bridge and spring across the span as a salmon leaps upstream. With a
spear, he struck the fortress gates. Behind him, the bridge swayed supple as
silk in the wind.

It was the last barrier.  The massive fortress gates swung open.  Knowing
Cuchulain's worth, Scathach received him:  only the valiant could breach her
barriers, and around this man's head shone the glowing light of the hero.

Thus she took Cuchulain into her company and trained him.  He spent long months


                                      -1-





in Alba, learning battle skills charged with magic, skills so strange that
while their names were long remembered, later generations, having lost the
arts, could not tell exactly what the skills might be. Some of their names
were:  the blade feat, the spear feat, the rope feat, the salmon feat and the
whirl of the brave chariot chief.

Cuchulain learned well, so well that no one lacking other-world training-and
few in Alba itself-would be a match fo him. He led Scathach's band. He fought
for her in her own battles and thereby got his only son:

As Cuchlain's training neared its end, a rival of Scathach's thundered through
the mountain passes at the head of an invading army. The challenger was called
Aifa, and she was a warrior queen of great prowess. Scathach's cadre of heroes
met the invaders, but it was Cuchulain alone who slew Aifa's champions. Then,
as was the custom, Aifa challenged Scathach to single combat.

But Cuchulain demanded to stand for his mentor.  Although he was warned of
Aifa's ferocity, all he asked was to know what she cherished.  Scathach told
him:  Aifa loved her horses, chariot and charioteer. Then Cuchulain went forth
to battle.

They fought with spears, but the spears shattererd harmlessly. The two were
closely matched in spear play. When they turned to swords, however, the woman
swiftly disarmed the man, her blade flashing up in the dusty air and breaking
Cuchulain's from its hilt.

But the Ulsterman was crafty. He shouted that Aifa's chariot and horses had
stumbled at the cliff edge and were in danger of sliding over. Caught by the
trick, Aifa turned her gaze for one instant, and in that instant, Cuchulain
seized her in his arms.

His grip was like iron;  he threw Aifa to the ground and pressed his dagger to
her throat, demanding surrender.  And she yielded to him.  She promised that
she would fight Scathach no more.  She said that she would give herself to
Cuchulain, who had conquered her. Thus Cuchulain took Aifa to her camp. and
kept her by him for some weeks.  He got her with child in that time and told
her what he knew in his heart. The child, Cuchulain said, would be a son.

"Send the boy to me in Ulster when he is seven," said Cuchulain.  Without
another word, he left Aifa, never seeing the light of vengeance that gleamed
behind her eyes.

Cuchulain's appointed year in Alba had drawn to its close, and so he returned
to Scathach's fortress to make his farewell. The chieftainess then gave him who
was the pride of her pupils the greatest of spears, the gae bolga. She blessed
his valor. And she made this prophecy:  that Cuchulain would triumph, one man
over multitudes;  that his greatness would live forever in the poets' songs;
that his life would pass as quickly as the dew.

Cuchulain cared everything for the fame and nothing for the brevity of the
warrior's life. He returned to Ulster, to the bride he had won and the glory
that was to come. But he never spared a thought for his child, left behind in
the shadow world of Alba.


THE GREAT KING'S LAST BATTLE:

The fellowship of the round Table was undone on a fine day in May, when King


                                      -2-





Arthur was old and tired and his court rife with secret factions. The King and
his champion, Lancelot, had enemies in the court, and chief among them was
Mordred, Arthur's bastard son. Mordred had four half brothers:  Agravain, as
spiteful as Mordred himself;  and Gawain, Gaheris and Gareth, steadfastly
faithful to Lancelot and the King. When Mordred and Agravain made their move,
their brothers flatly refused to join in it.

Mordred was determined to show that Lancelot was the Queen's lover and thus a
traitor to his King. One night, therefore, Mordred and Agravain - with twelve
companion knights - armed themselves and stole up the winding stair that led to
the Queen's chamber. They pounded on the door. Lancelot answered. He was indeed
with the Queen - long his lover - and unarmed.  But the knights could not press
their advantage, crowded as they were on the shadowy stair. Lancelot opened the
door;  he pulled the first knight, who was Colgrevaunce, into the chamber and
slammed the door again.  While the Queen watched, he killed Colgrevaunce with
the man's own sword. Then, in Colegrevaunce's armor, he hacked his way down the
stair, slaughtering all the conspirators except Mordred the talebearer, who
fled.

Lancelot and his supporters retreated to his own fortress, Joyous Garde.
Mordred went to the King with his story. And Arthur, trapped by the law he
himself had made, condemned his wife Guinevere to burn for her infidelity,
although it grieved him and his own knights bitterly protested.

But in the gray dawn of the execution morning, when Guinevere was bound to the
stake, Lancelot and his men charged through the throng to rescue the Queen.  In
the fight to reach her, Lancelot struck out blindly and, all unknowing, killed
Gareth and Gaheris, both unarmed. He freed the Queen and set her on his own
horse, and took her to his fortress.

When he heard of the slaying of his brothers, Gawain wept. And although he was
Lancelot's friend - and staunchest supporter against Mordred's intrigues he
swore revenge.  With Arthur's armies Gawain laid siege to Joyous Garde and
called upon Lancelot to meet him in single combat - the custom since the
earliest age of heroes.  But Lancelot refused to fight Gawain or the King, for
he loved them.  He withstood the siege for months, until men of the Church
persuaded Arthur to take Guinevere back. She went;  it was her duty.  Lancelot
and Guinevere said their farewells then.  Lancelot and his company went in
exile to his lands in France.

The fellowship was broken, the bright honor of the Round Table stained. Arthur
and his company returned to silent Camelot, and Arthur waited for the final
act.

Gawain brought it about;  he insisted that Arthur's honor be avenged. And at
last, with Gawain at the head of his army. Arthur traveled to France to battle
Lancelot. He left his son, Mordred, as regent in England.

For months, the armies fought in France, until Lancelot's land was laid waste.
Each day, Gawain challenged his old friend to single combat, and each day
Lancelot refused, until Gawain called down scorn upon his honor. Lancelot
agreed to fight.

They met in the field before Lancelot's fortress gates.  All the morning
Gawain's strength waxed, and Lancelot, well aware of the uncanny power that was
in his friend and enemy, husbanded his strength. When noon came, they fought
on, but Gawain's strength gradually waned, until it was like that of other
mortals, and Lancelot found the opening to strike Sir Gawain down.


                                      -3-





Gawain lay in the dust, bright blood pouring from his broken skull, and
implored Lancelot to finish him.  But Lancelot refused. "It goes against my
honor to strike a man I have felled," he said. "When you can stand, I will
fight you again." And he turned and left.

So an uneasy truce was kept while Gawain healed. He met Lancelot again to
fight, and again Lancelot gave way in the morning and triumphed in the
afternoon. Again his sword cleaved Gawain's skull, and again the blood poured
onto the ground.  Gawain has been felled, yet Lancelot would not strike his old
companion where he lay.

They were not fated to fight again, however for word reached them of Mordred
the traitor, who had usurped the throne. He had tried, too, to marry Gunievere,
his father's wife;  it was she who sent appeals for help.

Then Arthur swore to kill his son, and sailed for home.  The armies met on
Salisbury Plain;  the flower of chivalry died that day. And as he had sworn,
Arthur found Mordred and put his spear through the author of his grief. But
Mordred did not die at once. Howling like an animal, he thrust himself forward
on the spear until his belly met the handguard, and with his broadsword he
struck his father's head, through helmet and hair and bone to brain. Then
Mordred fell.

Arthur sank to the ground. The battlefield was still, save for the moans of the
wounded and the scrabbling of the looters who crept among the bodies. The King
closed his eyes a moment, fighting for consciousness, for he had something left
to do. When he opened them he saw a faithful face;  Sir Bedevere, one of the
few companions left alive, bent over him and whispered his name.

King Arthur commanded Bedevere to take the last action:  His sword, Excalibur,
must be returned to the waters whence it had come and to the people of the
other world who had made the great blade. There was a lake near the field,
still and mist-shrouded, and into this lake the reluctant Bedevere threw the
sword. It did not strike the water:  A hand broke the surface and seized
Excalibur in the air. Without a ripple, hand and sword vanished.

It was said that Bedevere carried the King to the lake edge then, and both
watched as a silk-draped boat glided through the mist. In the boat were tall
women sheathed in black;  they took the wounded King into their arms and glided
away over the water with him, and Bedevere wept to see the end.

He thought - and others thought - that Arthur had not died. The women, it was
said, were the company of the enchantress Morgan le Fay, who took Arthur to the
Isle of Apples, Avalon, to heal and protect him until England should need him
again.

And as for Guinevere, she retired to a nunnery, where she died. Lancelot, it
was said, went into the wilderness, where he, too, died. And Bedevere and the
few knights who had survived scattered, to journey forever alone in foreign
lands. When they were old, they told the tales of their youth and of the
shining fellowship they once had, when Arthur ruled Britain and true men fought
with the honor of the valiant.


TREACHERY OF THE NEBELUNGS:

Glory and treachery, early death and endless sorrow - these were the threads
that Scandinavian poets wove into songs about Sigurd, the last of Denmark's


                                      -4-





Volsung clan. The Volsungs were a race of heroes descended from the gods.  True
to his high lineage, Sigurd had barely reached manhood when he slew a dragon
that stood baleful watch over a treasure hoard. He capped the conquest by
bathing in the beast's blood. This made his flesh invulnerable, save for one
place on his shoulder where a linden leaf had fallen and covered his skin while
he took the gruesome bath.

After his encounter with the dragon, Sigurd rode south in search of new
adventure. Before many days passed, he spied a pillar of smoke rising from a
mountain peak and, eager to know the cause, guided his horse Greyfell up the
slope. As he neared the summit, he saw that the mountain itself burned:  The
peak was ringed with ramparts of fire.

Sigurd spurred his horse straight toward the flame, and Greyfell went willingly
hoofs hammering on the burning coals as if on cold pebbles. As they entered the
fire, it subsided to flickering tongues of flame and then died to ashes.
Sigurd saw what it had shielded:  a stone bier, and on the bier, the goldclad
body of a warrior.

Dismounting, he removed the warrior's helmet. A wealth of golden hair tumbled
out, framing a sternly beautiful face.  He cut the throngs that held the
glittering breastplate. The warrior was a woman. Moreover, she was alive:
Sigurd had evidently awakened her from a magical sleep.

For a moment, the woman gazed gravely up at him. then, with the litheness of
the battle-trained, she sprang to her feet and stood before him. She spoke, and
Sigurd's heart leaped within his breast. Sigurd had breached the fire fortress,
the woman warrior said, and only the bravest of mortals could do so. She was
therefore his.

This woman was a hero's prize indeed, as Sigurd recognized when she told him
her name:  Brynhild.  She was a Valkyrie, one of the heroic troop of near
goddesses who rode the clouds high above a battlefield, choosing the warriors
who would perish in glory. Once, however, she had chosen a warrior before his
appointed time, and she had been condemned to live among humankind and learn
its sorrows. But because she was a Valkyrie, she was sent into a deep sleep,
secure in the fire fortress, so that only the greatest of heroes, he who braved
the flames, should have her.

For a time - none knew how long - Sigurd and Brynhild taled together, and at
last they pledged their troth. In token of his vow, Sigurd gave the Valkyrie a
ring that he had taken from the dragon's hoard;  she gave him runic charms to
keep him high-hearted and strengthen his sword. then the mortal rode away to
find a king to serve - and deeds to do to make him worthy of this woman of the
clouds. Behind him, the Valkyrie sank once more onto her bier. The flames
sprang up, guarding her until Sigurd should claim her again.

Sigurd traveled long months through the world, finally reaching the land of the
Nibelungs, a forest tribe ruled by a King called Giuki. Sigurd's air of honor
and courage won him entrance to the King's hall, and his tale of dragon gold
and of his Valkyrie won him the attention of the Queen. Grimhild was her name,
she was a sorceress, and she ruled only by ambition for her children.

As she listened to the warrior's tale, the thought came to her that he was a
fitting match for her dauthter Gudrun. At once she devised a way to achieve
this end, offering the warrior a cup of wine tainted by her dark arts. Sigurd's
mind clouded, and the memory of his battle maiden sliped away. Beside him stood
Gudrun, tender and fair;  his heart moved toward her.


                                      -5-





Not many weeks passed before Sigurd married Gudrun, just as the sorceress had
planned. Gudrun's family became his, and Sigurd was as a brother to her
brothers - to Guttorm and Hogni and especially to Gunnar, the eldest and the
best. Sigurd and Gunnar hunted together and went to war together, and they
swore eternal friendship.

Then Grimhild, who watched all her children's doings closely, was ready to make
her second match. She sent her son Gunnar to woo Brynhild, finest of maidens,
and she sent Sigurd to aid him, Sigurd, his mind still held by the sorceress's
magic, the memory of his promies gone, was eager to help his companion and
brother, in this matter as in all others.

The two young men traveled to Brynhild's enchanted mountain. Sigurd held back
while Gunnar charged the fire fortress. Gunnar's horse refused to breach the
ring of flames. Then Gunnar tried again with Sigurd's horse, but Greyfell would
move for no rider other than Sigurd.

In the end, they used a ruse - as Grimhild no doubt had anticipated would be
necessary, for she had sent with them the magic that made it. With the aid of
spells, the young men exchanged shape;  in the guise of Gunnar, Sigurd charged
the flames and approached the Valkryie. Brynhild found a stranger by her bier.
She believed than that Sigurd must be dead, for only the greatest warrior in
the world could breach her wall of flame. This man had clearly taken Sigurd's
place in honor and valor. Grieving, she gave him her golden ring and agreed
that, as her own fate demanded, she would marry him.

Strife came into the family of the Nibelung Kings at the wedding feast of its
eldest son. Beside Gunnar and Brynhild in the hall sat Sigurd with his wife,
Gudrun, and Gudrun wore upon her hand the golden ring of the dragon hoard.
Brynhild stared. It was the very same Sigurd she had loved, tall, handsome,
with a broad brow and hair like curled copper. He met her eyes and looked
away.

In the days that followed, the women quarreled. Gudrun had seen the Valkyrie's
look of longing for her husband, and she did not like it. She told Brynhild
what Sigurd had said secretly) and innocently, having lost all memory of his
vow to Brynhild):  He had wooed Brynhild for Gunnar. Gudrun showed the golden
ring that Sigurd had kept as his reward and given to her, his wife, to wear.

Then Brynhild turned away from her husband, Gunnar, with contempt. It was not
he who had ridden through the ring of flames, and the trick he had used brought
shame to her. She spoke against Sigurd and demanded that Gunnar kill him to
retrieve his own lost honor.

But Gunnar would not do it. Sigurd, he said, was his blood brother. Brynhild
appealed - as was her right - to Gunnar's younger brother Hogni, who had a
spiteful nature and a taste for treachery. He took on the task . He began with
Sigurd's wife and contrived, with smooth words and protestations of anxiety for
Sigurd's safety, to make that loose-tongued woman reveal to him the one
vulnerability that Sigurd had - the spot on his shoulder that the linden leaf
had covered.

With that knowledge, the task of killing Sigurd was easy. Hogni went hunting
with him one day, deep in the German forests, and watched while Sigurd brought
down the prey. Hot and thirsty the two men raced for a spring to bathe and
drink, and Sigurd won the race.  He rose from the water, wet and laughing, his
back to Hogni. Hogni thrust a spear at his shoulder, the blade entered and
plunged deep.


                                      -6-





Thus die Sigurd. Brynhild, wild with grief, flung herself on his funeral pyre
and gave herself to the flame that she might have him for eternity. As for
Hogni and the rest of the Nibelung brood, they died years later, tricked into
fighting one another by Gudrun, who from the moment of Sigurd's death lived
only for vengeance.























































                                      -7-

