



INTERVIEW WITH MUAMMAR QADHAFI:

'I am a mixture of Washington and Lincoln'

Western journalists jokingly call it "the bar scene from 'Star Wars'"-referring
to the nightly gathering of wildly assorted business people, mullahs,
terrorists and advisers--Soviet and otherwise--in the lobby of the posh Al
Kabir Hotel. "Everyone's waiting to see Qadhafi," explains a Damacus based
Kurdish rebel leader.

Many don't make it. The Libya of Muammar Qadhafi, "the Leader," is no longer
the fountain of money it once was for salesmen of every description. Libya's
more than 3 million people are tightening their belts. Though the breadlines of
last year have all but disappeared, freight cranes in the port of Tripoli are
idle, and Libyans queue up to buy everything from disposable diapers to light
bulbs. At least half the shops on Tripoli's First of September Street have
closed.

Those who do see Qadhafi are mostly certifiable "revolutionary fighters."
Despite a staggering drop in Libya's annual oil revenues--at least $20 billion
since the late '70s-- he continues to finance a long list of terrorist groups.
"There's been no slowdown in funds or backing for revolution," says a Moscow
educated member of Georges Habash's Popular front for the Liberation of
Palestine. Nor is there any lessening of the frenzied anti-Semitishm and open
hatred of the Reagan administration tht permeate both government and public.

The image of Qadhafi as terrorist leader has changed, however, since the U .S.
air strike last April in retaliation for a Libya-sponsored bombing in West
Berlin. The image is no less violent, but with the unmasking of Syria's Hafez
Assad as a calculating manipulator of state terrorism who tries to deny his
role, Qadhafi appears as much an erratic cash cow as a guiding genius of
revolution.

Qadhafi rarely has been seen in public since the raid. But one evening in late
October, wearing a stylish jump suit, he climbed the red-carpeted stairs of his
mansion, which had been damaged in the American attack. There, surrounded by
pieces of shattered glass and marble, he talked with U.S. News & World Report
Senior Correspondent Richard Z. Chesnonff and American writer Barbara Victor,
author of Terrorism, who is now at work on a book about Qadhafi.

Q Colonel Qadhafi, is there any way to break the stalemate between the U.S.
and Libya?

When there is a change in the President of the United States, there will be
understanding not only between our two countries but with other countries as
well. Reagan now represents the interests of the Israelis, and he under the
influence of his foreign minister, who is an Israeli.

Q But Secretary of State Shultz is an American, born in the U.S.?

He's sacrificing the interests of the Americans in favor the Israelis. The
bombing raid on Libya was for the interests of the Israelis, because there is
no Libyan-American problem.

Q What you refer to as "support of liberation movements" Americans see as
terrorism?

What you view as terrorism is the Palestinian struggle for liberation against


                                      -1-





the Israelis. and whatever Reagan is calling terrorism is actually a struggle
of the people's liberation movement against terrorism.

What the Americans are doing is a terrorist act, and what the Israelis are
doing is a terrorist act. What the Palestinians, Nicaraguans, the Lebanese are
doing--this is a liberation movement.

Q But this "struggle" results in American deaths?

Exactly. America will be harmed because it involved itself for the benefit of
the Israelis.

Q What is the resolution of the Palestinian question?

There is no resolution. The Palestinian people, behind the Arab nation, will
continue fighting till the end.

Q Is the end the destruction of Israel?  Is that the final solution?

Maybe the destruction of the Arabs, maybe the destruction of Israel.

Q What's your reaction to suggestions that there was a Reagan admininstration
disinformation campaign against you?

The American people sit accused because they have not yet tried Reagan and his
gang for this scandal of disinformation, which outdid the Watergate scandal.
Also, they have not even tried him for this crime that you see here (pointing
to the rubble around him)--as a killer and a murderer and a madman.  Does this
serve the interests of the American people?  Does this build friendship?

Q There were reports that after the bombing raid you were deeply depressed?

This is part of the disinformation campaign, because during that period I was
out with the people more than normal.

Q Do you think President Reagan treid to kill you?

You can see (lauhing and gest uring to the ruinds surrounding him). He should
be treid as a killer, as a murdered.

Q Have the events of the last six months altered your support of what the U.S.
considers terrorist movements?

We have increased our support for the liberation movements of the Palestinians
and for all liberation movements throughout the world. To react to this
aggression, we have doubled our efforts with the liberation movements.

Q Even if your activities provoke a similar response from the U.S. government?

Even if they hit us with the atomic bombs!

Q Do the Abu Nidal and Georges Habash groups (both linked to terrorism) use
Libya as a base for their operations?

Libya is open for the Palestinians.

Q Is the Soviet Union still behind you as solidly as before?



                                      -2-





We are satisfied with the relationship with the Soviet Union--with our
friendship with the Soviet Union.

Q Would you comment on the recent break in relations between Great Britain and
Syria?

The West is mad!  It's still with the spirit of the Crusades. They would like
to enable the Israelis to control the Arab world, and they want to destroy the
Arabs. It's a colonial policy that has not changed.

Q Is there a difference in your mind between anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism, or
anti-Jewishness?

We don't hate the Jews, because some Libyans are Jews and some Arabs are Jews
and Judaism is a religion.

We don't hate religion;  we are against Zionism.  More clearly, we are against
colonialism. We would consider Palestine as occupied by these people-whatever
name you give them--even if they were Moslems. They are occupying Palestine,
and they have to be resisted.

I don't think a reasonable man can support Israel. This is a tyrant entity and
a terrorist one, and it is manufacturing atomic weapons. Why don't you stand by
the Palestinian people, who are persecuted and being displaced from their
lands?

Why did the Jews come from Europe to Palestine?  Because you persecute them in
Europe. They should get their rights as European citizens. We shouldn't pay the
price of the persecution of the Jews.

Q If Palestine were to go back into the hands of the Palestinians, where would
the Israelis go?

Most of them came as invaders from Europe and Russian, and they must go back to
their homes. The Arabs stayed 800 years in Spain, and then they came back.

Q But the Jews originated in Palestine, too?

We accept the Jews who were living with us before 1948--for thousands of
year,of course. These are Oriental Jews. But the others are all invaders.  the
right of the Arabs to resist is much stronger than Reagan and all of his
might.

Q The Arabs have been fighting among themselves for decades. Why are they so
disunited?

Because of Western colonization. Because the Arab homeland is divided into 20
countries because of the Western colonization.

Q Would a leader other than Yassir Arafat be more effective in uniting factions
within the Palestine Liberation Organization?

Generally, Yassir Arafat has failed. Who's going to be the alternative is
unknown yet.

Q Is it conceivable that Americans will face attacks by "liberation movements"
inside the United States?  Would you support the activities of such groups?



                                      -3-





Peoples have the right to defend themselves and to react to aggression.

Q Does a resolution of the Palestinian issue depend on unity within the Arab
world?

Of course. Why does America object to unity of the Arab nation?  This means
that the struggle of Abraham Lincoln was terrorism and was wrong. Why does the
United States object to liberation of Arab land?  This means that George
Washington's liberation was wrong and was terrorism.

Arab unity is a unification of Arab countries into states like the United
States. This is the role I am playing--a mixture of the roles of George
Washington and Abraham Lincoln.

Q Would you like to lead such a united Arab world?

(Smiling broadly) Yes. Why not?

Q What are your feelings about the fact that thousands of your fellow Moslems
in Afghanistan have died at the hands of Soviet troops?

This is a problem that concerns the people of Afghanistan.

America also occupies many countries at the request of those countries. It had
five bases here at the request of the Libyan government before the revolution.
Why didn't you consider this as occupation?

Q Has the tremendous drop in world oil prices caused Libya to adjust its
priorities, its standard of living?

It is the Western oil companies that are affected primarily, because they lost
a lot of revenue. No, we have not been affected.

I have one observation to make. Now, there are two different ideological lines
in the world--the Third World:  Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Arab
homeland. They are in labor of revolution either toward Marxism, which is
prevailing--the traditional direction, like Cuba and Ethiopia--or the
Jamahiriya. Libya is a Jamahiriya, a "state of the masses." Grenada, for
example, during the time of Maurice Bishop:  He was following the Jamahiriya
line. There was a Marxist coup against him and he was killed. Then came the
American intervention. Cuba, on the other hand, got the other direction, the
Marxist direction.

The war launched by America against Nicaragua, Grenada, Cuba--this is
compelling these countries to go Marxist. It's like you put pressure on Castro
to become a Communist. I am not a Communist, but I might be obliged--just to
nag America--to become a Communist out of spite.













                                      -4-

