



    THE GARDEN of the prince's house was had been beautiful.  It was wild and
yet kept in a trimmed way by an old gardener. At the moment it was bathed in
intense sunlight and deep, complex shadows.  The range of colors was
breathtaking -- pale lime, bitter emerald, mid-tones, neutral tints.  The house
was surrounded by tall, slender pines and old gnarled oaks and cedars. The
texture of the leaves were many and varied and communicated themselves through
sight to imaginary touch, exciting the senses;  the leaves were of the
tenderest flesh, superb in their prime, crisping to old age;  in this magic
land, there were no changing seasons.  In the shadows there were dark blue
veils, indigo dreams of plants fallen asleep, and odours of sweet decay.
Numerous places were layered with cast-off fruit of other years softened into
compost, feeding the ravenous living roots that interlaced the dark rich earth
beneath the grass lines that swept away from the veranda.
    From the house there came the sound of a young girl's voice, carried softly
on the evening breeze, praising the goddess who was overseeing the lush
twilight.  She sang the song of the young bride saying goodbye to her parents,
before setting out on the journey to her new home far away. There are songs for
the morning and evening to celebrate the lives and loves of the gods and
goddesses, both past and present.  This one was for the evening.  The garden
was cooling and quiet.  A blue-black crow with a red-yellow beak swooped from
the tiled roof of the house looking for its supper.  Where the dying sunlight
struck the lawn, gathering evening dew-drops looked liked a scattering of
crystals.
    The lawn was surrounded by bushes of white and red bougainvillaea.  Some of
the bushes were hybrids and had branches that bore sprays of both colours.
Elsewhere, there were jasmine and beds of dark-red lilies.
    The house and garden stood on a hill, protected from the outside world by
close-formed battalions of trees.  There were tamarind, casuarina, banyan, ash,
oak, cedar, pipul . . .
    Two generations before a prince had built the house to install a beautiful
young girl from the village at the bottom of the hill as an expensive way of
impressing her father -- as if, indeed, a prince had need to impress a wealthy
merchant who was secretly panicking over finding a husband for his eldest
daughter.  The prince visited the girl in this house every morning and every
evening, wooing her, and begging her to sing to him.  She sang mournful,
plaintive songs, and such a song was what the wind was now carrying, a memory
of that young girl from the bottom of the hill, who died of a broken heart so
many years before.
    The prince grieved for his requited love, and commanded his court musicians
to record her songs and learn them, finally becoming enamoured, not of the
girl's form, but of her spirit contained within the songs that endured long
past her death and spoke of how she had guarded her honour to the last breath.
    The prince's son despised his father's weakness with the girl, however, and
closed the house, leaving the garden like his kingdom to fall into ruin and
decay.  The young prince built another house nearby for his courtesans and
rough friends, emptying the treasury and not caring that his people starved
both physically and spiritually.  A stranger in his court was poisoned, and
then it was revealed the stranger was a diplomat from a land far away.  War
seemed imminent, so the prince was deposed by his generals and ministers.  The
people were glad that such a burden had been taken from their shoulders, and
the garden, once filled with tangled, strangling weeds seem to free itself from
their influence and reassert a calm over the land and in the heart of the
leaders.
    The garden was now occupied by ghosts, and the voice of the young girl was,
in fact, the spirit of that merchant's eldest daughter still trapped in the
living wood beams and rafters.  At times she could be seen -- a pale sight,
dressed in the fashion of her day, standing on the verandah, swaying to and
fro, her arms cupped before her chest as if nursing a baby, though her arms are


                                      -1-





empty.
    The grandson of the prince was now busy rebuilding and reclaiming the house
and garden, cleansing his family's and the kingdom's honour and the symbol of
that honour -- the garden.  The house itself had a flagged inner courtyard;
verandahs with rounded arches shading the up[per as well as the ground floor
rooms.  The brickwork was stuccoed and painted cream that always dried to a
pale yellow.  Stone steps led from the gravelled driveway to the front entrance
that had peonies and colourful vines wrapped around the lintel.  In the arches
of the verandahs roses hung from the balustrade on the upper floors, while from
the lower bright red explosions of hyacinths filled in the gap between earth
and crafted wood.  Where the clusters were only leaves there were clay pots
that had been filled with shrubs and flowers, while climbing plants embraced
the pillars of the arches.
    An old man with a grizzled face, dressed in a white vest and cheesecloth
pants tied with twine, moved in a stiff arthritic way as he carefully tended
the plants with gnarled fingers.  His skin was burnt purple and tanned by the
wind and his bare toes clung to the ground, horny as the shell of a turtle.
    What made this evening so special was that after a lifetime of tending the
plants for the young prince, and glimpsing the ghostly figure of the girl,
hearing her voice carried softly on the wind -- she for the first time spoke
directly to the old gardener who fell to his knees in shock and awe.







































                                      -2-

