



Patrick Henry, March 23, 1775.


No man thinks more highly than I do of the patriotism, as well as abilities, of
the very worthy gentlemen who have just addressed the House.  But different men
often see the same subject in different lights;  and, therefore, I hope it will
not be thought disrespectful to those gentlemen if, entertaining as I do
opinions of a character very opposite to theirs, I shall speak forth my
sentiments freely and without reserve. This is no time for ceremony.  The
questing before the House is one of awful moment to this country.  For my own
part, I consider it as nothing less than a question of freedom or slavery;  and
in proportion to the magnitude of the subject ought to be the freedom of the
debate.  It is only in this way that we can hope to arrive at truth, and
fulfill the great responsibility which we hold to God and our country. Should I
keep back my opinions at such a time, through fear of giving offense, I should
consider myself as guilty of treason towards my country, and of an act of
disloyalty toward the Majesty of Heaven, which I revere above all earthly
kings.

Mr. President, it is natural to man to indulge in the illusions of hope.  We
are apt to shut our eyes against a painful truth, and listen to the song of
that siren till she transforms us into beasts. Is this the part of wise men,
engaged in a great and arduous struggle for liberty?  Are we disposed to be of
the number of those who, having eyes, see not, and, having ears, hear not, the
things which so nearly concern their temporal salvation?  For my part, whatever
anguish of spirit it may cost, I am willing to know the whole truth;  to know
the worst, and to provide for it.

I have but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of
experience.  I know of no way of judging of the future but by the past.  And
judging by the past, I wish to know what there has been in the conduct of the
British ministry for the last ten years to justify those hopes with which
gentlemen have been pleased to solace themselves and the House.  Is it that
insidious smile with which our petition has been lately received?  Trust it
not, sir;  it will prove a snare to your feet.  Suffer not yourselves to be
betrayed with a kiss.  Ask yourselves how this gracious reception of our
petition comports with those warlike preparations which cover our waters and
darken our land.  Are fleets and armies necessary to a work of love and
reconciliation?  Have we shown ourselves so unwilling to be reconciled that
force must be called in to win back our love?  Let us not deceive ourselves,
sir.  These are the implements of war and subjugation;  the last arguments to
which kings resort.  I ask gentlemen, sir, what means this martial array, if
its purpose be not to force us to submission?  Can gentlemen assign any other
possible motive for it?  Has Great Britain any enemy, in this quarter of the
world, to call for all this accumulation of navies and armies?  No, sir, she
has none.  They are meant for us:  they can be meant for no other.  They are
sent over to bind and rivet upon us those chains which the British ministry
have been so long forging.  And what have we to oppose to them?  Shall we try
argument?  Sir, we have been trying that for the last ten years.  Have we
anything new to offer upon the subject?  Nothing.  We have held the subject up
in every light of which it is capable;  but it has been all in vain.  Shall we
resort to entreaty and humble supplication?  What terms shall we find which
have not been already exhausted?  Let us not, I beseech you, sir, deceive
ourselves.  Sir, we have done everything that could be done to avert the storm
which is now coming on.  We have petitioned;  we have remonstrated;  we have
supplicated;  we have prostrated ourselves before the throne, and have implored
its interposition to arrest the tyrannical hands of the ministry and
Parliament.  Our petitions have been slighted;  our remonstrances have produced


                                      -1-





additional violence and insult;  our supplications have been disregarded;  and
we have been spurned, with contempt, from the foot of the throne!  In vain,
after these things, may we indulge the fond hope of peace and reconciliation.
There is no longer any room for hope.  If we wish to be free - if we mean to
preserve inviolate those inestimable privileges for which we have been so long
contending - if we mean not basely to abandon the noble struggle in which we
have been so long engaged, and which we have pledged ourselves never to abandon
until the glorious object of our contest shall be obtained - we must fight!  I
repeat it, sir, we must fight!  An appeal to arms and to the God of hosts is
all that is left us!

They tell us, sir, that we are weak;  unable to cope with so formidable an
adversary.  But when shall we be stronger?  Will it be the next week, or the
next year?  Will it be when we are totally disarmed, and when a British guard
shall be stationed in every house?  Shall we gather strength but irresolution
and inaction?  Shall we acquire the means of effectual resistance by lying
supinely on our backs and hugging the delusive phantom of hope, until our
enemies shall have bound us hand and foot?  Sir, we are not weak if we make a
proper use of those means which the God of nature hath placed in our power.
The millions of people, armed in the holy cause of liberty, and in such a
country as that which we possess, are invincible by any force which our enemy
can send against us.  Besides, sir, we shall not fight our battles alone.
There is a just God who presides over the destinies of nations, and who will
raise up friends to fight our battles for us.  The battle, sir, is not to the
strong alone;  it is to the vigilant, the active, the brave.  Besides, sir, we
have no election.  If we were base enough to desire it, it is now too late to
retire from the contest.  There is no retreat but in submission and slavery!
Our chains are forged!  Their clanking may be heard on the plains of Boston!
The war is inevitable - and let it come!  I repeat it, sir, let it come.

It is in vain, sir, to extenuate the matter.  Gentlemen may cry, Peace, Peace -
but there is no peace. The war is actually begun!  The next gale that sweeps
from the north will bring to our ears the clash of resounding arms!  Our
brethren are already in the field!  Why stand we here idle?  What is it that
gentlemen wish?  What would they have?  Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as
to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery?  Forbid it, Almighty God!
I know not what course others may take;  but as for me, give me liberty or give
me death!






















                                      -2-

