# My Little Programming Tutorial

There are a slew of programming tutorials available in books and on the web
that will teach you things like what variables are, how if statements work, and
the like. These guides will show you all the building blocks of computer
programs, and they hope that by giving you these tools, you'll be able to put
them together to build a full application. While they will usually walk you
through building some primitive example app (how often have you written "hello
world", made a "guess-the-number" game, or implemented a todo manager?), they
often leave much to be desired in terms of giving you an intuitive
understanding how you're supposed to use all this newfound knowledge.

This tutorial will attempt to attack the problem differently. We're going to
start with a non-trivial (and fun!) problem, and then examine what pieces we
need to build a solution. I hope that this might give you a softer, more
approachable, and more fun introduction to the fabulous world of computer
programming.

So, what are we going to do you ask? We're going to build a fully working
Tetris clone! That's right. By the end of this tutorial, you'll be left with a
playable version of the beloved game, complete with [Super Rotation
System](http://tetris.wikia.com/wiki/SRS) support, dashing graphics, and a
score counter. Not a bad feat as a novice programmer!

Before we begin, you might wonder why you should listen to me, and whether I
even know what I'm talking about. Well...

## About the author

I'm Jon. We'll be spending some time together over the course of this tutorial,
so I'm telling you my name so you can shout it when you get annoyed. I'm also
known as Jonhoo on the web, and I should be pretty easy to find if you get
stuck (though do try **think** first!). I'm a Computer Science PhD student at
MIT, and have been programming for about a decade at the time of writing.
Hopefully I'm not completely hopeless at it. I've open-sourced a bunch of code,
and make occasional contributions to other open-source projects.

Now that we've got that out of the way, I want to briefly discuss who you are
(or should be) if you're reading this tutorial...

## Who is this for?

This guide is in no way meant for people who are familiar with programming
already. I will explain things like arrays, loops and functions in painstaking
detail, and you will most likely be bored. That said, I aim to keep this
tutorial fun (we're building a game after all), so I will try to not move too
slowly either. Part of the goal is to teach you that solving a problem often
requires acquiring information from multiple sources, and I will frequently be
telling you to go elsewhere for more details.

## What do I need?

The tutorial code will be written in the fairly popular programming language
JavaScript, and the game itself will be rendered using HTML canvas. Don't worry
too much if you don't know what these things are; all will be clear in the end.
The choice of langauge and graphical interface is fairly arbitrary, and was
chosen mainly for simplicity of expression. It also means that the only things
you need to follow this guide is:

  - A browser (preferably a newer one, and one that can render graphics; lynx
    is probably a poor choice for this).
  - A text editor (not Microsoft Word or Pages. We're going back to the basics
    here. Preferably, you want a programer's editor that has nice colors and
    autocompletion. Notepad++ is a good place to start on Windows, TextMate2
    I've heard Mac OS X people are happy about, and Linux users generally stick
    to vim or emacs.

## Let's get started

Okay, so, if you still think this is the right tutorial for you, and you've
assembled the two things I said you needed, it's time to dive in. Move to
[start](start.md) to begin.
