



                              PLATO

                     SUMMARY OF THE REPUBLIC

Socrates, Glaucon, Polemarchos, Thrasymachos, Adeimantos, Cephalos


BOOK I:

Polemarchos invites Socrates and Glaucon to visit his father Cephalos' house.
Various other friends are there as well.  Cephalos talks about old age:
eventually the conversation turns to the subject of justice.  How do you define
justice?  asks Socrates.  Polemarchos puts forward Simonides' definition - to
render what is due - but this on examination proves unsatisfactory.  Here
Thrasymachos breaks in, maintaining that the whole conversation so far has
consisted of nothing but pious platitudes.  Justice, he says, is whatever suits
the strongest best. Might is right.  A ruler is always just.  Socrates suggests
that even a ruler sometimes makes a mistake, and orders his subjects to do
someting which is really not to his advantage at all.  Is he just when he does
this?  Thrasymachos answers that in so far as he is mistaken he is not a true
ruler.  Socrates then argues that a doctor is primarily concerned to heal the
sick, and only incidentally to make money:  similarly, medicine seeks not its
own advantage but the advantage of the human body.  By analogy a ruler seeks
the advantage of his subjects, not of himself.

Thrasymachos then rushes off on a new tack.  Injustice, he says, is virtuous,
and justice is vicious.  Justice is everywhere at the mercy of injustice, which
is reviled not because men fear to do it but because they fear to suffer it.
Socrates sets out to disprove this view, and establishes that justice is
apparently wise and virtuous, and at the same time more profitable than
injustice.  But, he says, he is still without a definition of justice.


BOOK II:

Glaucon and Adeimantos then develop further objections to Socrates'
conclusions.  Is justice, says Glaucon, any more than society's refuge from the
consequences of the doctrine that true success depends on being as unjust as
possible?  Has it really a value for its own sake?  Whereupon his brother
Adeimantos adds that everybody is in fact as unjust as he can be without being
found out;  is there any value in justice itself, he asks, as distinct from a
reputation for justice?

At this stage Socrates suggests that the nature of justice is more easily to be
discovered in the macrocosm, the state, than in the microcosm, the individual.
This is agreed and the discussion shifts to the origins and composition of a
city-state.  People associate for mutual support, because different men have
different abilities.  Society flourishes because it is efficient:  it enables
each person to devote himself to the task he is best fitted for, and saves him
from dispersing his energies in other tasks he is not fitted for at all, and
which he will thereofre perform indifferently.

Socrates then describes the various classes of persons in a city, ending with
the highest class, the rulers or guardians, who require the highest qualities.
They must be both courageous and philosophical, both brave and wise.  How are
these qualities to be developed?

This leads to the subject of education, which, Socrates says, seems to consist


                                      -1-





of gymnastic for the body and music (in the broad sense of the arts) for the
soul. He takes literature, a part of music, first of all, because education
begins, he says, in the nursery, with fables and fairy stories.  These must be
very carefully censored to ensure a suitable moral tone;  and in particular the
gods must always appear in a virtuous light.  God must be portrayed as the
author of good only, not of evil, and as incapable of falsehood.


BOOK III:

Literature, Socrates continues, must deal only with suitable subjects, and only
in a suitable manner.  He prescribes in some detail as to both subject and
form:  in effect, the poet may tell only plain stories of virtuous people.  The
same considerations apply to music, as we mean the word:  none but the Dorian
and Phrygian, the manly and sober modes, are to be allowed, and those rhythms
expressive of an orderly and brave life.  The practice in the other arts is to
be similarly regulated;  and in the result a noble art, purified of
unwholesomeness and extravagance, will develop in the young the characteristics
of nobility.  By learning to appreciate the good and the beautiful in art, they
will learn to love them in life.

In gymnastic, as in music, a wholesome simplicity is prescribed.  There will be
in the city little disease and few lawsuits.  But care must be taken to hold
the balance between music and gymnastic:  excess in the former leads to
effeminacy, and excess in the latter to harshness.  It is a mistake to suppose
that music trains the soul while gymnastic trains the body:  gymnastic is as
much a part of the soul's education as music is, and the noblest natures, at
once brave and wise, require a harmonious blend of the two.

From the noblest natures, Socrates goes on, the rulers of the city will be
chosen - the best of the older men, selected for their devotion to the state by
various tests and carefully groomed for office.  They will be assisted by the
lower class of guardians, the auxiliaries or soldiers.  Their rule over the
city will be supported by the mystical sanction of the myth of the three
metals, gold, silver and iron. And they will not live the life of princes, but
the simple life of soldiers, free from the distractions of wealth and luxury.


BOOK IV:

Adeimantos remarks that the arrangements for the guardians do not sound very
inviting.  Socrates replies that this is not the point, even if it is a true
criticism, which he doubts;  he is concerned not with the happiness of parts
but with one harmonious whole, the happy city. The unity of this city, he says,
depends mainly on three principles - equal shares for all, so that there are no
rich and no poor;  a physical limit of size;  and the recognition of merit
regardless of birth.  These precepts are to be safeguarded by the educational
system previously laid down, and all else will then follow - a perfectly
arranged city which will endure as long as the purity of the system itself is
maintained.

If this is the perfect city it must contain justice, and besides, wisdom,
courage and temperance.  Wisdom, says Socrates, is to be found in the thinking
element, the guardians, and it is the knowledge in the light of which they lead
the city. Courage or spirit, the quality of the soldiers, is the preserver of
the constitution from the twin dangers of war and sedition.  Temperance is
common to all three classes, and is the harmonious and beneficial relationship
between them.  Now for justice - which is the virtue that enables all the


                                      -2-





others to flourish, and is none other than the old principle put forward in
Book II, by which each class does the work for which it is fitted without
presuming upon the preserves of the others.

So much for the city.  Applying this argument to the individual, Socrates finds
that the three classes in the state are reflected in three elements in the
soul, the reasoning, the spirited, and the desiring, corresponding to the
counsellors, the assistants or soldiers, and the producers.  Justice is
therefore the due arrangement of these three elements in their proper stations
in the soul, namely that the reasoning part rules, with its auxiliary the
spirited part, over the desiring part.

Socrates then begins to discuss the nature of injustice, and the five types of
political structures. One type, the only good one, has been dealt with;  the
other four are all more or less bad.


BOOK V:

Socrates is here interrupted by Polemarchos, who asks him to fill in the
outline of the perfect city in more detail, before going on to the degenerate
ones.  This leads to a long digression, the main theme being picked up again at
the start of Book VIII.

After a little preliminary skirmishing Socrates deals with the position of
women in the perfect city.  Woman, he says, is the weaker sex;  but there are
no occupations for which a woman is unfitted merely because she is a woman.  He
then describes a society in which all institutions and relationships are
ruthlessly subordinated to the preservation of the unity of the state, and
private life as well as private property are rejected. The city-state thus
becomes the smallest as well as the largest - in fact the only - unity of
social life.  Socrates is just starting to investigate the nature of wars, and
the difference between civil war and foreign war, when Glaucon asks the
fundamental question whether the perfect city, desirable as it may be, can ever
possibly be achieved in fact.  No, replies Socrates, unless there comes about a
union of wisdom and power in the person of the philosopher-king.

In the rest of Book V Socrates defines what he means by philosopher, a lover of
wisdom.  True knowledge is concerned not with the physical world of the senses
but with the qualities, the realities, that are inherenent in the everyday
world - with Beauty, not with beautiful sounds and colors.  The changing world
of the senses is the object of opinion, but the unchanging world of realities
is the object of true knowledge or wisdom, and it is this wisdom that true
philosophers love.


BOOK VI:

The guardians of the city, then, are to be true philosophers in this strict
sense. Socrates is describing their other good qualities when Adeimantos
objects that in fact philosophers have a very different reputation - of being
knaves or fools or both.  Socrates explains the reasons for this.  A
philosopher will never be a popular hero, because he has no time to waste on
mere party politics, and it is success in this lower sphere alone which earns
the plaudits of the crowd.  But he admits that a large number of professed
philosophers are rascals.  Once corruption sets in, the very excellence of the
philosophic qualities leads to great temptation and great evildoing.  In an
unsympathetic, if not actively hostile, world only a few remain faithful to the


                                      -3-





principles of true philosophy.  These few must be helped and encouraged by
means of the educational system already described;  but philosophy is not a
subject which can be acquired at school or in the teens, it is a lifelong
study, and extra facilities must be provided accordingly.  In sum, says
Socrates, his proposals are desirable if they can be realized, and their
realization is difficult but not impossible.

Socrates then reverts to his definition of justice in Book IV. This, he says,
was a superficial treatment of the subject.  Now he speaks of the highest truth
of all, which underlies justice and all the other virtues.  This, the Idea of
the Good, the guiding star of the soul, is the end of the philosopher's study.
As the sun is the world of sight, the Idea of the Good is to the world of
mind.  He goes on to the four divisions of the Divided Line, a refinement of
the distinction between these two worlds, as already sketched in Book V.  The
physical world of the sun, the domain of opinion, contains in its lower class
images, such as shadows and reflections, and in its higher class physical
objects, such as animals and trees.  The corresponding division in the world of
mind, the domain of knowledge, is between, on the one hand, concepts of a
mathematical type, which depend on given postulates, and on the other hand, the
eternal verities, the Ideas or Ideals, comprehended by dialectic in the light
of the Idea of the Good. The four categories are the subjects of conjecture,
belief, understanding, and the exercise of reason respectively, and partake in
ascending order of clearness and truth.


BOOK VII:

Socrates goes on to the story of the cave, which illustrates the escape of the
philosopher from the fetters and darkness of the physical world of the senses
to the freedom and dazzling radiance of the world of mind.  But, he says, the
philosopher must afterwards return to the cave to enlighten and set at liberty
those still imprisoned there.

How is this escape made possible?  By the study of a class of subjects which
deal in abstractions:  these are arithmetic, the study of numbers, and, of less
importance, plane and solid geometry, astronomy so far as it concerns the
principles of movement of solids, and harmonics, the study of sound.  All these
have a practical application, but their real value lies in their power to lead
the soul out of the darkness of the changing world of the senses towards the
light of the unchanging world of mind.  Fortified by these exercises in
abstract thought, the soul at last learns, through the study of dialectic, to
comprehend the Idea of the Good.

In the last part of Book VII Socrates describes in more detail the practical
application of his curriculum. After the standard education in music and
gymnastic the selected student passes on to the abstract subjects and thence to
dialectic, with frequent tests on the way.  The few who reach the summit, at
about the age of fifty - and Socrates reminds his hearers that they may be men
or women - divide the rest of their lives between philosophy and the affairs of
state.

Finally, Socrates repeats that his proposals will only be realized by a
philosopher-king, an unlikely combination perhaps, but not an impossible one.


BOOK VIII:

The perfect city and kingly or aristocratic character having now been fully


                                      -4-





described, Socrates reverts to the point reached at the end of Book IV, and
proceeds to deal with the four degenerate forms of constitution and the four
corresponding types of individual.

The aristocratic constitution degenerates into the timocratic (or honour-
loving) when the warrior class prevails over the wisdom-loving class, and
imposes a militant policy dictated by ambition and the love of glory.
Similarly, in the soul of the timocratic man the spirited part gains precedence
over the reasoning part, and the result is a valiant but contentious and
ambitious nature.

The timocratic constitution degenerates into oligarchy (the rule of the few)
when honour-loving turns to money-grubbing.  The city is divided into rich
rulers and poor subjects.  In the soul of the oligarchic man, pleasure-loving
but ungenerous, the desiring part prevails over the reasoning and spirited
parts.

The oligarchic constitution degenerates into democracy (the rule of the people)
when the poor in the oligarchic state revolt.  All are then set free to do as
they wish - and, says Socrates in effect, to go to the devil in their own way.
Where the oligarchic man, thrifty at heart, gave way only to the moneymaking
(or necessary) desires, the democratic man, casting off even this restraint,
gives free rein to the spendthrift (or unnecessary) desires, and liberty is
thus complete.

The democratic constitution degenerates into tyranny when men tire at last of
the lawlessness of a liberty which has become license. They appoint a strong
man to restore order;  he raises a bodyguard or private army to suppress the
irresponsible elements in society;  and, unperceived, tyranny is established in
the city.


BOOK IX:

The tyrannic man, continues Socrates, is ruled by the worst class of the
unnecessary desires.  To the lawlessness of the democratic man he adds the
frenzy of lust;  utterly without scruple, he is driven to boundless excess by
passions he can never sate.  The tyrannic man, like the tyrannic state, is
slave to fear, want, every sort of misery and every sort of wickedness:  he is
last in happiness, below the kingly man, the oligarchic man and the democratic
man in descending order.

This is Socrates' first answer to Thrasymachos' argument in Book I, that
injustice is more profitable than justice.  He continues with another. The
three elements in the soul distinguished in Bok IV lead the three classes of
men in which they respectively rule in pursuit of wisdom, honour and pleasure.
Each class will maintain its own aim to be the highest, but clearly the best
opinion will be that of the wisdom-loving or philosophical man, because he will
be the most experienced and the best equipped to judge.  We must agree with him
that wisdom-loving is superior to honour-loving and honour-loving to
pleasure-loving.

Yet a third argument follows.  Socrates analyzes the kinds of pleasure enjoyed
by the three classes:  the philosopher's pleasure in wisdom is best because it
partakes most of the unchanging world of truth and real being;  the pleasures
of victory and honour come next;  and last of all is the pleasure of gratified
desire, which is no more than a fleeting shadow of true pleasure.



                                      -5-





Finally Socrates deals with the question raised by Glaucon and Adeimantos in
Book II, whether justice is valuable for its own sake. The three elements in
the soul are likened to a man, a lion and a monster:  in the soul of the just
the man rules, in the soul of the unjust the monster rules.  Clearly the first
condition is intrinsically of more value than the second, and a spurious
appearance of justice cannot make injustice any more praiseworthy.

Socrates ends Book IX by saying that whether or not the perfect city exists on
earth, it is laid up in heaven as a pattern for mankind.


BOOK X:

Socrates now returns to his criticism of the artist.  He distinguishes three
levels of reality, instancing the ideal bed, the bed you sleep on, and the
image of a bed in a picture.  The artist functions at the lowest level;  he
only portrays the actual, not the ideal bed:  art is mere imitation of an
appearance of reality. Now, imitation is essentially an activity inferior to
doing or making;  and moreover the artist will never even be able to imitate
particularly well, because his knowledge of his subject is bound in every case
to be inferior to a practical knowledge of it.  However diverting, art cannot
be a serious occupation.

Nevertheless, art does appeal to some element in the soul - not, says Socrates,
the rational element, but the irrational.  In literature, for example, the poet
will not imitate the reasonable man but the foolish and unstable man, because
the latter will, he thinks, give more scope for effect, and will also be a more
congenial subject for the foolish and unstable part of the soul.  The tendency
of art to corrupt even the best of natures, by thus encouraging the lower
element at the expense of the higher, is all the more dangerous because of
art's undoubted fascination;  and the soul in pursuit of virtue must be
ceaselessly on guard against it.

The last section of Book X follows the fortunes of the just and the unjust to
the after life.  Everything, says Socrates, has its own evil, tending to
corrupt and destroy, and its own good, tending to preserve.  The soul is
corrupted by its evil vice, but is not destroyed by vice;  it is hardly likely,
therefore, to be destroyed by the evil of the body, disease.  In fact disease
and death do not affect the soul at all - obviously they perish with the body;
in the after life, as on earth, it fares according to its deserts, the just
soul being eternally rewarded and the unjust soul eternally punished.  With the
fable of Er, in which these conclusions of the argument are given mystical
form, the Republic ends.

















                                      -6-

