Texis Version ...

SQL 1 line 1> -- Test metamorph
SQL 2 line 2> -- 
SQL 3 line 3> -- Set defaults for known state, eg. in case texis.cnf mods:
SQL 4 line 4> set querysettings = 'defaults';

SQL 1 line 5> -- Turn off query protection so we can do linear searches etc.:
SQL 2 line 6> set querysettings = 'protectionoff';

SQL 1 line 7> 
SQL 1 line 8> 
SQL 1 line 9> create table test (x varchar(100), y varchar(100));
     x            y      
------------+------------+

SQL 1 line 10> 
SQL 1 line 11> insert into test values ('alien', 'alien');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
alien        alien

SQL 1 line 12> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/alien') where y = 'alien';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
alien        



ALIEN LIFE-STYLES

There is much more scope for the free play of the imagination when it comes
comes to alien ecology - the business of constructing food chains and equipping
alien beings with the means to secure their food supplies and to reproduce.
Science fiction writers and illustrators have always enjoyed designing cunning
and alarming predators to menace Earthly space-travellers;  such design is much
enlivened by incorporating the monstrous creatures into an exotic but coherent
ecological background.  One of the first writers to do this with appropriate
ingenuity was Stanley G. Weinbaum, and such stories as "The Mad Moon",
"Parasite Planet", and "Flight on Titan" (all 1935) are still unsurpassed in
the sheer delight which they take in devising weird life-systems, though they
are fatally dated in other ways.

The most common variation used by science fiction writers involves attribvting
intelligence (and hence dominance) to non-human creatures.  To imagine that
intelligent humanoids might have evolved from cats rather tahn apes is
relatively straightforward, but certain difficulties stand in the way of the
ever popular lizard-men who figure so frequently as science fictional
villains.  Reptiles, having no internal temperature control, are rather limited
in the amount of brain activity they can indulge in;  the same problem might
limit the possibility of intelligence in cephalopods.  Science fiction writers
occasionally attribute intelligence to viruses or plants, but these exotic
creations are clearly implausible without a good deal of apologetic argument to
explain what they can have developed to substitute for brains, and how the
complexity of their actions is so great as to require intelligent
coordination.

Even conscientious science fiction writers tend to assume that intelligence
would be strongly favored by natural selection in all possible circumstances.
This is not necessarily so:  the vast majority of Earthly organisms are highly
successful and perfectly well adapted to their circumstances without being
conspicuously intelligent and without having anything obvious to gain from
becoming more intelligent.  It remains to be seen whether our intelligence will
guarantee us a longer evolutionary lifetime than worms, flies, snails or
mushrooms, but after studying the form no serious gambler would make us the
favorites.

It seems reasonable to argue that intelligence is only advantageous to certain
kinds of organisms, and therefore goes hand in hand (if the pun may be excused)
with such traits as manipulative ability.  If human beings did not walk
upright, freeing their forelimbs to develop hands instead of paws, they could
not have developed the kind of intelligence they have. Similarly, intelligent
beings must be sociable, because intelligence also arises out of the need to
communicate.  The fact that most mammals and birds show a degree of
intelligence not seen in reptiles is connected with the fact that they
generally have more complicated social relationships, especially in connection
with the rearing of the young.  The more sociable animals are, and the more
able they are to interfere with and transform their own environment, the more
intelligent they are likely to become.  The same principle must be applied to
alien beings:  their intelligence must fit in with the logic of their
situation.

The association of intelligence with communication has led science fiction
writers to imagine a range of peculiar and ingenious communication systems.
Systems of sign language are most popular - for instance, the Asadi in Michael
Bishop's novel, "Transfigurations" communicate by means of rapid color changes
in the irises of their eyes, and their books are plastic disks with central


                                      -1-





lenses which flash out long color sequences.  Even when they do use sound waves
for communication, alien languages are sometimes very different from human ones
- communication by means of musical chord, as in the film "Close Encounters of
the Third Kind" is a familiar variation.

The design of alien life-forms - especially when it come to fitting them into
food chains, and describing methods of reproduction - relies heavily on forms
found within the Earthly life-systems.  The great changes undergone by insects
as they pass through larval and pupal forms to adulthood, has been a constant
source of inspiration. Aliens which undergo a whole series of metamorphoses are
featured in many stories, notably James Blish's "A Case of Conscience," in
which the inhabitants of the planet Lithia recapitulate their evolutionary
history as they develop from egg to adult.

The planet Lithia is also notable for being a well thought out example of the
popular science fiction idea of the big planet.  This is a planet without heavy
metals.  Being less than our own metal heavy Earth, such a planet - if it had
Earthly gravity and therefore Earthly mass - would have to be big, maybe twice
the diameter of our own.  If our own solar system is as represen- tative of
planetary evolution throughout the Galaxy as some scientists believe, such big
planets may be rare or non-existent.  Alien life on these planets would tend
toward the primitive by our standards, as technology would be difficult to
establish without metals. But of course as a substitute ceramics might do
well.

The design of complicated alien reproductive systems is perhaps best
exemplified in the work of Philip Jose Farmer, who has shown a consistent
interest in alien sexual relations.  His story "Mother" features a remarkable
encounter between a human being and an immobile female alien, which relies upon
trapping other creatures to stimulate self-fertilization in much the same way
that many Earthly flowers depend on attracting insects.  The alien mother in
Farmer's story then rears her active young in her uterus-like interior.  The
human protagonist, after initial resistance settles down to a comfortable
lifetime - literally back to the womb.

A life-cycle which is often borrowed by science fiction writers is that of the
ichneumon fly, which lays its eggs in live caterpillars so that when the larvae
hatch they enjoy an abundant supply of fresh meat.  The idea of aliens which
can use human beings in this fashion is a wonderfully horrific one, and
cinematic special effects allow it to be displayed gruesomely in the film
"Alien".  Even at a more elementary level, the notion of alien parasites which
might infest human beings is ready made for melodrama, and analogies with the
myth of Dracula and the idea of demonic possession are frequently invoked.  In
Robert Heinlein's novel "The Puppetmasters", loathesome sluglike creatures
attach them to people, feeding on their bodies and taking control of their
minds.

Though such stories are exciting they are biologically suspect.  Most parasites
are, in fact, rather choosy about the hosts they attack;  parasites and their
hosts tend to evolve together and are co-adapted.  Also, from an ecological
point of view, the most successful parasite is likely to be the most prudent -
the one which inflicts least harm or, where destruction is necessary, behaves
like a sensible conservationist in maintaining its resources.  Arguably, the
really well adapted parasite is one that does not harm its host at all, but
actually provides some return for hospitality. This kind of relationship,
symbiosis, is a notion which has fascinated science fiction writers just as
much as the notion of monstrous alien parasites.



                                      -2-





On Earth there seem to be very few mutually beneficial relationships between
animals (most of the real examples are of plant/animal symbiosis), but science
fiction writers have been relatively generous in scattering such relationships
around on other worlds.  Inevitably science fiction writers have been drawn to
the prospect of symbiotic relationships between human beings and aliens, though
these are biologically suspect for exactly the same reasons that human/alien
parasitism is suspect.  Particularly ingenious are a few stories which suggest
that we are already living unknowingly in parasitic or symbiotic relationships
with alien beings.  In Eric Frank Russell's "Sinister Barrier" people discover
that we are maintained like cattle by invisible alien vampires who feed upon
the energy of our nasty emotions;  while the heroes of Clifford Simak's "Time
and Again" and Bob Shaw's "Palace of Eternity" make the much more comforting
discovery that we live in symbiotic harmony with equally undetectable
energy-beings that provide a secular substitute for souls.

It is understandable that science fiction writers have mainly concentrated, for
dramatic purposes, on one or two species of intelligent alien species at a
time.  There are few attempts in science fiction to describe whole life-systems
with all their complex profusion. Science fiction has not produced - and almost
certainly cannot produce - anything as wonderfully complex and diverse as
Earth's life-system:  the task is impossibly great and would yield little in
the way of dramatic rewards. There are, however, some notable attempts to offer
visions of exotic life-systems which are, by implication, as complex as the one
which produced us.  A most impressive biological phantasmagoria is presented in
Brian Aldiss's "Hothouse", though this is actually a far future Earth, much
changed by evolution, rather than an alien world.  Nothing quite as rich has
been credited to an alien world, but such writers as Poul Anderson and Hal
Clement are always adventurous and conscientious in suggesting complexity and
diversity.  It is not infrequent for writers trying to construct whole
life-systems to get carried away.  They may impute a mystical harmony to the
whole complex of ecological relationships, as in Piers Anthony's "Omnivore" or
the several stories in which whole life-systems are imagined as single
organisms, including the world-spanning network of plant life in Ursula
LeGuin's "Vaster Than Empires and More Slow" and the living planet in Stanislaw
Lem's "Solaris".

Most of the marvelous technologies and miraculous new life-forms imagined in
science fiction's tomorrows are rooted in the knowledge we have today.  But
many science fiction writers resent being pinned down to a drily responsible
examination of actual probabilities.  The laws of natures give them
claustrophobia, seeming as they do to render impossible some of the most
dramatic and interesting scenarios in science fiction.


















                                      -3-



SQL 1 line 13> insert into test values ('constn', 'constn');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
constn       constn

SQL 1 line 14> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/constn') where y = 'constn';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
constn       Preamble

We the People of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessing of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish the Constitution of the United States of America.

Article I.

Sect. 1. All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and a House of Representatives.

Sect. 2. The House of Representatives shall be composed of members chosen every second year by the people of the several states, and the electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the state legislature. 
	No person shall be a representative who shall not have attained to the age of twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state in which he shall be chosen.
	Representative and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several states which may be included within this Union, according to their respective numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free persons, including those bound to service for a term of years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other persons.  The actual enumeration shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent term of ten years in such manner as they shall be law direct.  The number of representative shall not exceed one for every thirty thousand, but each state shall have at least one representative; and until such enumeration shall be made, the state of New Hampshire shall be entitled to choose three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five, New-York six, New-Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten, North-Carolina five, South-Carolina five, and Georgia three.
	When vacancies happen in the representation from any state, the Executive authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.
	The House of Representatives shall choose the Speaker and other officers; and shall have the sole power of impeachment.

Sect. 3. The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two senators from each state chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years and each senator shall have one vote.
	Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first election, they hall be divided as equally as may be into three classes.  The seats of the senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the second year, of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year, and of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year, so that one-third may be chosen every second year; and if vacancies happen by resignation, or otherwise during the recess of the legislature of any state, the Executive thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the Legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.
	No person shall be a senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.
	The Vice-President of the United States shall be President of the Senate, but shall have no vote unless they be equally divided. 
	The Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President pro tempore, in the absence of the Vice-President, or when he shall exercise the office of President of the United States.
	The Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments.  When sitting for that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation.  When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.
	Judgement in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under the United States; but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to law.

Sect. 4. The times, places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof: but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations, except as to the places of choosing Senators.
	The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall be law appoint a different day.

Sect. 5. Each house shall be the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its own members, and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner, and under such penalties as each house may provide.
	Each house may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for disorderly behaviour, and with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a member.
	Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the members either house on any question shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present be entered on the journal.
	Neither house, during the session of Congress shall, without the consent of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in which the two houses shall be sitting.

Sect. 6. The senators and representatives shall receive a compensation for their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the United States.  They shall in all cases, except treason, felony and breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of their respective houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any speech or debate in either house, they shall not be questioned in any other place.
	No senator or representative shall, during the time for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States, which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been increased during such time; and no person holding any office under the United States, shall be a member of either house during his continuance in office.

Sect. 7. All bill for raising revenue shall originate in the house of representative; but the senate may propose or concur with amendments as on other bills.
	Every bill which shall have passed the house of representatives and the senate, shall, before it become a law, be presented to the president of the United States; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it.  If after such reconsideration two-thirds of that house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other house, by which is shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two-thirds of that house, it shall become a law.  But in all such cases the votes of both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house respectively.  If any bill shall not be returned by the President within ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their adjournment prevent its return, in which case it shall not be a law.
	Every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the Senate and House of Representative may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the same shall take effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.

Sect. 8. The Congress shall have power     
	To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the United States; but all duties, imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States.
	To borrow money on the credit of the United States;
	To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and with the Indian tribes;
	To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States;
	To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the standard of weights and measures;
	To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the United States;
	To establish post offices and post roads;
	To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries;
	To constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court;
	To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offences against the law of nations;
	To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make rules concerning captures on land and water;
	To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two years;
	To provide and maintain a navy;
	To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;
	To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union, suppress insurrections and repel invasions.;
	To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the militia, and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively, the appointment of the officers, and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress;
	To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular States, and the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the government of the United States, and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the states in which the same shall be, for the erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and other needful buildings; -And 
	To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by the Constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof.

Sect. 9. The migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty may be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.
	The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety require it.
	No bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.
	No capitation, or other direct, tax shall be laid, unless in proportion to the census or enumeration herein before directed to be taken.
	No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any state.  No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of one state over those of another: nor shall vessels bound to, or from, one state, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.
	No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.
	No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States:--And no person holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without the consent of the Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state.

Sect. 10. No state shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; grant letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, or grant any title of nobility.
	No state shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws; and the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid by any state on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the Treasury of the United States; all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the Congress.  No state shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty of tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war in time of peace, enter into any agreement or compact with another state, or with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay.

Article II.

Sect. 1.  The executive power shall be vested in a president of the United States of America.  He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and, together with the vice-president, chosen for the same term, be elected as follows.
	Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of senators and representatives to which the state may be entitled in the Congress: but no senator or representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit under the United States, shall be appointed an elector.
	The electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote by ballot for two persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves.  And they shall make a list of all the persons voted for, and of the number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the president of the senate.  The president of the senate shall, in the presence of the senate and house of representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall then be counted.  The person having the greatest number of votes shall be the president, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who have such majority, and have am equal number of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who have such majority, and have an equal number of votes, then the house of representatives shall immediately choose by ballot one of them for president; and if no person have a majority, then from the five highest on the list the said house shall in like manner choose the president.  But in choosing the president, the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice.  In every case, after the choice of the president, the person having the greatest number of votes of the electors shall be the vice-president.  But if there should remain two or more who have equal votes, the senate shall choose from them by ballot the vice-president.
	The Congress may determine the time of the choosing the electors, and the day on which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout the United States.
	No person except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United States, at the time of the adoption of this constitution, shall be eligible to the office of president; neither shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not have attained to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a resident within the United States.
	In case of the removal of the president from office, or his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the vice-president, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or inability, both of the president and vice-president, declaring what officer shall then act as president, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a president be elected.
	The president shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a compensation, which shall neither be encreased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the United States, or any of them.
	Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following oath or affirmation:
	"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of president of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the constitution of the United States."

Sect. 2. The president shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the United States, and of the militia of the several States, when called into the actual service of the United States; he may require the opinion, in writing of the principal officer in each of the executive departments, upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective offices, and he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offences against the United States, except in cases of impeachment.
	He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, to make treaties, provided two-thirds of the senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, judges of the supreme court, and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law.  But the Congress may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think proper, in the president alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of departments.
	The president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess of the senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their session.

Sect. 3. He shall from time to time give to the Congress information of the state of the union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both houses, or either of them, and in case of disagreement between them, with respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper; he shall receive ambassadors and other public ministers; he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed, and shall commission all the officers of the United States.

Sect. 4. The president, vice-president and all civil officers of the United States, shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

Article III.

Sect. 1.  The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one Supreme Court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish.  The judges, both of the Supreme and inferior courts, shall hold their offices during good behavior, and shall, at stated time, receive for their services a compensation which shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.

Sect. 2.
	1. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity, arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or which shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls; to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction; to controversies to which the United States shall be a party; to controversies between two or more States, between a State and citizens of another State, between citizens of different States, between citizens of the same State claiming lands under grants of different States, and between a State or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens, or subjects.
	2. In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and those in which a State shall be a party, the Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction.  In all the other cases before mentioned, the Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such exceptions and under such regulations as the Congress shall make.
	3. The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury; and such trial shall be held in the State where the said crimes shall have been committed; but when not committed within any State the trial shall be at such place or places as the Congress may by law have directed.

Sect. 3.
	1.  Treason against the United States shall consist only in levying war against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort.  No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or on confession in open court.
	2.  The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason, but no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture except during the life of the person attained.

Article IV

Sect. 1. Full faith and credit shall be given in each State to the public act, records, and judicial proceedings of every other State.  And the Congress may, by general laws, prescribe the manner in which such acts, records, and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.

Sect. 2.
	1. The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several States.
	2. A person charged in any State with treason, felony, or other crime, who shall flee from justice, and be found in another State, shall, on demand of the executive authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the State having jurisdiction of the crime.
	3. No person held to service or labor in one State, under the laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or regulation therein, be discharged from such service or labor, but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.

Sect. 3.
	1.  New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no new State shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other State, nor any State be formed by the junction of two or more States, or parts of States, without the consent of the legislatures of the States concerned as well as of the Congress.
	2.  The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United States, or of any particular State. 

Sect. 4.  The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a republican form of government, and shall protect each of them against invasion; and on application of the legislature, or of the executive (when the legislature cannot be convened), against domestic violence.

Article V.

	The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both House shall deem it necessary, shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the application of the legislatures of two-thirds of the several States, shall call a convention for proposing amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid, to all intents and purposes, as part of this Constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States, or by conventions in three-fourths thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress; provided [that no amendment which may be made prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the first and fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first Article;] and that no State, without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.

Article VI.

Sect. 1.  All debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this Constitution, as under the Confederation.

Sect. 2.  This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of  the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every State shall be bound thereby, anything in the constitution or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.

Sect. 3.  The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the several State legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of the United States and of the several States, shall be bound, by oath or affirmation, to support this Constitution; but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United States.

Article VII.

	The ratification of the conventions of nine States shall be sufficient for the establishment of this Constitution between the States so ratifying the same.

	Done in Convention, by the unanimous consent of the States present, the seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-seven, and of the Independence of the United States of America the twelfth.  In Witness whereof, we have hereunto subscribed our names.

Attest:  William Jackson, Secretary
         George Washington
         PRESIDENT AND DEPUTY FROM VIRGINIA

NEW HAMPSHIRE
John Langdon
Nicholas Gilman

MASSACHUSETTS
Nathaniel Gorham
Rufus King

NEW YORK
Alexander Hamilton

NEW JERSEY
William Livingston
David Brearley
William Paterson
Jonathan Dayton

PENNSYLVANIA
Benjamin Franklin
Thomas Mifflin
Robert Morris
George Clymer
Thomas Fitzsimons
Jared Ingersoll
James Wilson
Gouverneur Morris

DELAWARE
George Read
Gunning Bedford, Jr.
John Dickinson
Richard Bassett
Jacob Broom

MARYLAND
James McHenry
Dan of St. Thomas Jennifer
Daniel Carroll

VIRGINIA
John Blair
James Madison, Jr.

NORTH CAROLINA
William Blount
Richard Dobbs Spaight
Hugh Williamson

SOUTH CAROLINA
John Rutledge
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney
Charles Pinckney
Pierce Butler

GEORGIA
William Few
Abraham Baldwin

AMENDMENTS

1st Amendment
	Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.

2nd Amendment
	A well-regulated militia being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.

3rd Amendment
	No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quarters in any house, without the consent of the owner; nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.

4th Amendment
	The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated; and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.

5th Amendment
	No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous, crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in actual service, in time of war, or public danger; nor shall any person be subject, for the same offence, to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled, in any criminal case, to be a witness against himself; nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation.

6th Amendment
	In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law; and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and to have the assistance of counsel for his defence.

7th Amendment
	In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved; and no fact, tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-examined in any court of the United States than according to the rules of the common law.

8th Amendment
	Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishment inflicted.

9th Amendment
	The enumeration in the Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.

10th Amendment
	The powers not delegated to the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of another State or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.

11th Amendment
	The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of another State or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.

12th Amendment
	The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot for President and Vice President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same State with themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice President; and they shall make distinct lists of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice President, and of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign, and certify, and transmit, sealed, to the seat of the Government of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate; the President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and the House of Representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall then be counted; the person having the greatest number of votes for President shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed; and if no person have such a majority, then, from the persons having the highest numbers, not exceeding three, on the list of those voted for a President, the House of Representative shall choose immediately, by ballot, the President.  But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States, the representation from each State having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a choice.  And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President, whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, [before the fourth day of March next following] the Vice President shall act as President, as in case of death, or other constitutional disability of the President.  The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice President, shall be the Vice President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of Electors appointed; and if no person have a majority, then, form the two highest numbers on the list, the Senate shall choose the Vice President; a quorum for the purpose shall consist of two-thirds of the whole number of Senators; a majority of the whole number shall be necessary to a choice.  But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice-President of the United States.

13th Amendment
	Sect. 1. Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime, whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.
	Sect. 2. Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

14th Amendment
	Sect. 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside.  No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law, nor deny any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
	Sect. 2. Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed.  But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and Vice President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the executive and judicial officers of a State, or the members of the legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.
	Sect. 3. No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof.  But Congress may, by a vote of two-thirds of each House, remove such disability.
	Sect. 4. The validity of the public debt of the United States, authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall not be questioned.  But neither the United States nor any State shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations, and claims shall be held illegal and void.
	Sect. 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.

15th Amendment
	Sect. 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
	Sect. 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

16th Amendment
	The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several States and without regard to any census or enumeration.

17th Amendment
	The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State, elected by the people thereof, for sex years; and each Senator shall have one vote.  The electors in each State shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the State legislatures.
	When vacancies happen in the representation of any State in the Senate, the executive authority of such State shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: Provided, That the legislature of any State may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointment until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.
	This amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of any Senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the Constitution.

18th Amendment
	Sect. 1. After one year from the ratification of this article the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the importation thereof into, or the exportation thereof from the United States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof for beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.  
	Sect. 2. The Congress and the several States shall have concurrent power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
	Sect. 3. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of the several States, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years of the date of the submission hereof to the States by Congress.

19th Amendment
	The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.
	Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

20th Amendment
	Sect. 1. The terms of the President and Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d day of January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin.
	Sect. 2. The Congress shall assemble at least once in every years, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3d day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
	Sect. 3.  If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the President-elect shall have died, the Vice President-elect shall become President.  If a President shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the President-elect shall have failed to qualify, then the Vice President-elect shall act as President until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may by law provide for the case wherein neither a President-elect nor a Vice President-elect shall have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice President shall have qualified.
	Sect. 4. The Congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the House of Representatives may choose a President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the Senate may choose a Vice President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them.
	Sect. 5. Sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of October following the ratification of this article.
	Sect. 6. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission.

21st Amendment
	Sect. 1. The eighteenth article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.
	Sect. 2. The transportation or importation into any State, Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited.
	Sect. 3. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by conventions in the several States, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the States by the Congress.

22d Amendment
	Sect. 1. No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person who has held the office of President, or acted as President, for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President shall be elected to the office of the President more than once.  But this Article shall not apply to any person holding the office of President when this Article was proposed by the Congress, and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of President, or acting as President, during the term within which his Article becomes operative from holding the office of President or acting as President during the remainder of such term.
	Sect. 2. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several states within seven years from the date of its submission to the States by the Congress.

23rd Amendment
	Sect. 1. The District constituting the seat of Government of the United States shall appoint in such manner as the Congress may direct:
	A number of electors of President and Vice President equal to the whole number of Senators and Representative in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it were a State, but in no event more than the least populous State; they shall be considered, for the purposes of the election of President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by a State; and they shall meet in the District and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.
	Sect. 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

24th Amendment
	Sect. 1. The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election for President or Vice President, for electors for President or Vice President, or for Senator or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any State by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.
	Sect. 2. The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

25th Amendment
	Sect. 1. In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President.
	Sect. 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.
	Sect. 3. Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speakers of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
	Sect. 4. Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
	Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.  Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session.  If the Congress, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office.

26th Amendment
	Sect. 1. The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of age.
	Sect. 2. The Congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

SQL 1 line 15> insert into test values ('declare', 'declare');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
declare      declare

SQL 1 line 16> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/declare') where y = 'declare';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
declare      




THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE

When in the course of human events it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which
the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among
these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. That to secure these
rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed.  That whenever any form of government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish
it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such principles
and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their safety and happiness.  Prudence, indeed, will dictate that
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient
causes;  and accordingly all experience hath shown, that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed.  But when a long train of
abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design
to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future
security. Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies;  and such is
now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of
government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of
repeated injuries and usurpations, all having, in direct object, the
establishment of an absolute tyranny over these States. To prove this, let
facts be submitted to a candid world.

He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.

He has forbidden his Governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be
obtained;  and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the
legislature, a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable, and
distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose of
fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.

He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly
firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.

He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected;  whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have
returned to the people at large for their exercise;  the State remaining in the
meantime exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without and convulsions
within.

He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these states;  for that purpose


                                      -1-





obstructing the laws of naturalization of foreigners;  refusing to pass others
to encourage their migration hither, and raising the conditions of new
appropriations of lands.

He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to laws
for establishing judiciary powers.

He has made judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their offices
and the amount and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers
to harass our people, and eat out their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies without the consent of
our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of, and superior to, the
civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our
constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws;  giving his assent to their acts
of pretended legislation.

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us.

For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these States.

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world.

For imposing taxes on us without our consent.

For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury.

For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offences.

For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighbouring Province,
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries so
as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these Colonies.

For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamentally the forms of our governments.

For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection and
waging war against us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns and destroyed
the lives of our people.

He is, at this time, transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to
complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun, with
circumstances of cruelty and perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous
ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.



                                      -2-





He has constrained our fellow citizens taken captive on the high seas to bear
arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends and
brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring
on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, whose known
rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes, and
conditions.

In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most
humble terms:our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated
injury.  A prince whose character is thus marked by every act which may define
a tyrant is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor have we been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have warned
them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an
unwarrantable jurisdiction over us.  We have reminded them of the circumstances
of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice
and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to
disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connections and
correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces
our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war,
in peace, friends.

We, therefore, the Representatives of the United States of America, in General
Congress assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the
rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name, and by the authority of the good
people of these Colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these United
Colonies are, and of right ought to be, Free and Independent States;  that they
are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political
connection between them and the State of Great Britain, is and ought to be
totally dissolved;  and that as Free and Independent States, they have full
power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and
to do all other acts and things which Independent States may of right do.  And
for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of
Divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes,
and our sacred honor.

                                                         John Hancock




















                                      -3-



SQL 1 line 17> insert into test values ('events', 'events');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
events       events

SQL 1 line 18> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/events') where y = 'events';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
events       Wednesday, August 8, 1990
Almanac and Headline News
Almanac for August 8 not available.
---------
Headlines
   ---
   Iraq's president says his country will-  in his words-  ``confront
any imperialist, Zionist attack'' against Iraqi occupation forces in
Kuwait. The United States is mounting a huge military presence in the
Gulf region.
   ---
   A meeting in Bonn today failed to produce an agreement between West
German Chancellor Kohl and opposition leaders on holding earlier
all-German elections. Kohl was trying to convince the politicians to
hold voting in October instead of December.
   ---
   Religious and human rights leaders in South Africa are joining with
the African National Congress in calling for the government to rein in
its security forces. The leaders say failure to do so will threaten a
break-through in peace talks.
   ---
   Health Secretary Louis Sullivan says he accepted an apology from
California Representative Fortney ``Pete'' Stark and he considers the
matter between them closed. Stark sent a letter apologizing for saying
Sullivan was a disgrace to the black race.

---------
Arafat heads guest list at Kreisky funeral
By JOBY WARRICK

   VIENNA (UPI) - Former Chancellor Bruno Kreisky was eulogized
Tuesday as one of Austria's greatest and longest-serving leaders of the
20th century at a state funeral attended by PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat
and more than 150 other foreign VIPs.
   Prime ministers or foreign ministers from 10 European states were
among the dignitaries who marched behind Kreisky's flag-draped coffin in
the one of the grandest funeral processions in postwar Austrian history.
   Tens of thousands of Austrians stood in a steady drizzle to view
the solemn procession as it wound along Vienna's famous Ringstrasse from
the parliament building to the grounds of the Imperial Palace, seat of
the old Hapsburg empire.
   Kreisky, who died July 29 at age 79, was to be buried later in the
day at the Central Cemetery, where many of the nation's most famous
politicians, musicians and artists are buried.
   ``We mourn today the loss of a great man,'' Austrian Chancellor
Franz Vranitzky said in an eulogy. ``But we do not just mourn, but we
reflect, and we derive new strength ... to meet new tasks and
challenges.''
   The number and caliber of the foreign guests attending the funeral
were seen as a measure of Kreisky's impact during a quarter-century as a
member of the Austrian government, including 13 years as chancellor.

				    -1-

   Besides being one of the principle architects of Austria's
permanent neutrality, Kreisky rose to international prominence as one of
the first Western European leaders to openly advocate Palestinian2
self-determination and to try to break down barriers between Eastern and
Western Europe.
   In 1979 he became the first Western head of government to host
Arafat, the leader of Palestine Liberation Organization, in an official
state visit. Arafat returned the compliment by attending Kreisky's
funeral, conspicuous among the dark-clad mourners in his trademark
headdress and military uniform.
   Among the other foreign VIPs were prime ministers Felipe Gonzales
of Spair, Ingvar Carlsson of Sweden, Marian Calfa of Czechoslovkia,
Petre Roman of Romania and Hans Brunhart of Liechtenstein, as well as
foreign ministers Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany, Marcus Meckel
of East Germany, Gianni De Michelis of Italy, Roland Dumas of France and
Pertti Paasio of Finland.
   President Bush sent U.S. Ambassador to West Germany Vernon Walters
to the funeral as his personal emissary. Representing the Soviet Union
was Georgi Arabtov, a close advisor to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
   Among the speakers at Kreisky's funeral was Dumas, who lamented the
absence of Kreisky's ``brave voice'' from the world's political stage.
   As chancellor of Austria from 1970 to 1983, Kreisky was one of
post-war Europe's leading Social Democrats and was immensely popular at
home, where his political longevity and leadership style earned him the
nickname ``Kaiser Bruno.''
   Born to upper middle-class Jewish parents, Kreisky joined Austria's
underground Socialist movement in the 1930s and fled to Sweden when his
country was annexed to Nazi Germany in 1938.
   He returned to occupied Austria after the war, and as a Foreign
Ministry undersecretary helped negotiate the 1955 treaty that won
Austria its independence and established its permanent neutrality.
   As foreign minister from 1959 to 1966, he adopted a pragmatic
approach to the realities of Cold War-era Europe, becoming the first
Western foreign minister to visit Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary.
   His ties with Arafat and Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi drew
criticism from other Western leaders, but enabled him to serve as
mediator in Middle East conflicts.

------

Leaky oil blockade against Iraq will fail
By LEE STOKES

   CAIRO, Egypt (UPI) - The industrialized nations' strategy to bring
Baghdad to its knees by blacklisting Iraqi oil will entail a tricky
switch to alternative supplies, and can only work if the boycott is long
term and total, analysts said.
   Experts say the West's strategy has the potential to cripple Iraq's
oil-based economy, and compel Iraqi President Saddam Hussein to withdraw
from Kuwait.
   But they say a long-term embargo which denies Iraq a market for its

				    -2-

oil will be more effective, but also more difficult to sustain, than
trying to interdict overland pipelines through Saudia Arabia and Turkey
or using a naval blockade to stop any shipments through the Persian
Gulf.
   ``(Saddam) foresaw an international blockade ... but he felt he
could survive because the West needs Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude,'' one
Middle East diplomat said. ``Iraq is hoping it can always sell its crude
on the black market if sanctions are imposed.''
   Key consumers such as the United States, France, West Germany and
Japan have already put short-term economic interests aside to punish
Saddam, refusing to buy Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil and accepting the
inevitable rise in the price of the crucial commodity.
   More than 70 percent of the two nations' output was destined for
Japan, the United States and the European Community.
   Iraq acknowledged Monday that demand for its oil has fallen, and
closed one of two pipelines passing through Turkish territory to the
Mediterranean, reducing the flow in the second by 30 percent.
   Experts believe the move was a tactical bluff aimed at showing it
can survive the blockade now being put into place.
   A total boycott of Iraqi and Kuwaiti oil (now controled by Iraq)
could cut world supplies by 4.64 million barrels a day - about 10
percent of the world's traded crude. But several other OPEC member
states have spare production capacities and could cover the difference.
   The West's thirst for the vital crude must be satisfied either by
major producers like Saudi Arabia and Venezuela increasing production,
or by using strategic oil reserves.
   ``Even if Turkey and Saudi Arabia refuse to shut down their oil
pipelines, an international blockade could still be effective,'' said
David Butter, editor of the London-based Middle East Economic Digest.
   Monday's edition of the Cyprus-based oil industry newsletter,
Middle East Economic Survey, said OPEC members would have to break
current cartel quota levels if the shortfall caused by Iraq and Kuwait
was to be compensated for.
   ``Here the key obviously lies with Saudi Arabia,'' the newsletter
said. ``But there must be considerable doubt as to how far the kingdom
would be prepared to go in antagonizing Iraq.''
   Oil industry sources in the Gulf state of Bahrain said Turkey and
Saudi Arabia would pay a price if they forbid Iraqi shipments.
   Turkey receives 60 percent of its own oil and $250 million per year
in transit fees from Iraq.
   Even more ominous, the sources believed Saudi interference in the
oil flow would be viewed by Baghdad as a declaration of war.
   The wild card is whether key consumer nations, having overridden
short-term economic interests, can sustain the strategy long-term.
   ``Key importers such as Japan have decided that if this situation
continues, then the long-term future of the world economy will be in
danger ... so they have decided that quick, firm action now is the best
way to curb the effect on the world economy,'' one oil industry source
said.
   Former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger told NBC-TV that an
effective blockade would compel Baghdad to end its venture in Kuwait.

				    -3-

   ``If no oil is being bought from Iraq and Kuwait and if the
economic blockade is made effective for several months, I think that
then Iraq will have to withdraw,'' Kissinger said on Sunday.
   But many experts believe there may be a weakening of resolve if
increased oil prices spur inflation in various nations and create
consumer discontent. Then, many governments may abandon their principles
and purchase oil on the black market from the pariah regimes.
   The unanimity of the blockade is virtually unprecedented.
   Unlike U.S. sanctions on Iran during the 8-year-long Persian Gulf
war, other key oil importers such as Japan and the European Community
kept importing Iranian crude, allowing Tehran to bankroll the bloodshed.
   U.S. imports of Iraqi and Kuwaiti crude during the first five
months of this year averaged 609,000 and 116,000 barrels a day,
respectively, equivalent to 10 percent and 2 percent of total U.S. crude
imports.
   Iran said Monday turbulance in the world oil market caused by the
Iraq-Kuwait crisis was temporary and asked OPEC member-states to stick
to their production quotas, the official Islamic Republic News Agency
reported.
   Iranian Oil Minister Gholamreza Aqazadeh told reporters in Tehran
the industrialized states would fall back on their oil reserves during
the crisis to tide over shortages in the market caused by a possible
halt or slow-down in Iraqi and Kuwaiti exports.
   Aqazadeh said the OPEC agreement does not allow any member state to
make up for shortages in production of another member state.
   The Iranian oil minister predicted that oil prices would continue
to rise for a while on the world market, but he ``was not sure how long
it would continue,'' He asked OPEC member-states therefore to ``preserve
their self-control.''
   Regional analysts said Aqazadeh had an ax to grind in asking other
OPEC member states not to produce more. Iran stands to make considerable
revenue gains from price rises.

------

Benazir Bhutto: First woman prime minister of an Islamic country
By United Press International

   Benazir Bhutto, 37, became Pakistan's prime minister in December of
1988 following the suspicious death of her longtime foe Gen. Mohammed
Zia ul-Haq, who had seized power from Bhutto's father in 1977 and had
him executed.
   Benazir Bhutto, a Radcliffe educated exile, had returned to
Pakistan in 1986, vowing to avenge her father's death and restore
democracy to her country. She was greeted by hundreds of thousands of
followers, but few observers believed the young woman would be taken
seriously in the conservative Islamic nation of 100 million.
   But Bhutto realized her dreams when Zia was killed in the
suspicious explosion and crash of his military plane on Aug. 17, 1988.
Bhutto, pregnant with her first child, campaigned in elections Zia had
called before his death.

				    -4-

   She portrayed her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, as a martyr and many
of her countrymen saw her as her father's political heir.
   Shortly after returning to Pakistan in 1986, Benazir Bhutto told a
rally: ``Seeing you, the people, makes me feel that he is alive before
my eyes. He (her father) told me in our last meeting that I must
sacrifice everything for my country. This is my mission.''
   The people agreed, electing her Pakistan People's Party into power
and making Bhutto the first woman prime minister of an Islamic country.
Earlier this year, she became the first head of state in modern times to
give birth when she had her second child, a daughter.
   Some feminists complained Bhutto moved too slowly in changing
Pakistan's laws that discriminate against women, but Bhutto, who wears a
veil in public, argued that she wanted steady change for her nation,
where tradition is a force to be reckoned with.
   She attempted to strengthen Pakistan's alliances with other Islamic
nations, traveling throughout the Middle East to meet with leaders
unaccustomed to dealing with women in power.
   Bhutto also grappled with escalating tensions between Pakistan and
neighboring India over Kashmir, a mostly-Islamic region fighting for
independence from predominately Hindu India.
   Born June 21, 1953, into a wealthy, landowning family in Sind
Province, Bhutto was noted for her outspoken manner and independent will
- unusual qualities for a woman in conservative Islamic Pakistan.
   The eldest of four children, she was particularly favored by her
Western-educated father, who became Pakistan's leader in 1971. Even as a
young girl, ``Pinky,'' as she was known to family and friends, took a
keen interest in politics.
   Some believed her father trained her as his successor. In 1972,
Bhutto took Benazir to India for a meeting with Prime Minister Indira
Gandhi.
   ``I live and breathe politics from the moment I get up through to
the night,'' she once said.
   At 16, Bhutto was accepted by Radcliffe college in Massachusetts
where she spent four years and developed her talent for oratory. She
later crossed the Atlantic to polish her education at Britain's Oxford
University, where she studied politics.
   Sophisticated and outgoing, Bhutto enjoyed popular music and
hamburgers and became the focus of attention among Oxford's smart set.
That changed after her Zia seized power from her father, who was hung in
1979.
   ``After the coup d'etat, I was pulled into the political arena,''
Bhutto said. ``I felt that it was a struggle for life and death - first
for my father and then for his cause.''
   Zia quickly moved to suppress her struggle, keeping Bhutto and her
mother, Nusrat, in jail or under house arrest and harassing them with
legal actions.
   Bhutto distanced herself from her Oxford-educated brothers,
Shahnawaz and Murtaza, who moved to neighboring Afghanistan and founded
an extremist anti-Zia group.
   Benazir Bhutto and her mother were allowed to leave Pakistan for
England in 1984, where they lived in self imposed exile.

				    -5-

   ``They thought I would come to my senses, enjoy myself, forget
politics,'' Bhutto said.
   Instead Bhutto took over leadership of the Pakistan People's Party
from her ailing mother and devoted much time to settling differences
between party officials.
   To test Pakistan's new political freedom, Bhutto returned in April
1986 and began an exhausting series of rallies to press for fresh
parliamentary elections and Zia's resignation.
   Political rivals accused her of showing the same autocratic
tendencies as her father, but Bhutto was undetered.
   ``I asked myself, why am I going around in circles? Why am I
leading a life that is physically exhausting and socially barren?''
Bhutto said. ``One gets strength from one's own country.''
   On Dec. 18, 1987, she married a wealthy, polo-playing Pakistani
businessman, Asif Zardari, greeting 100,000 of her followers at a
``people's reception'' after the ceremony.
   She made clear the match was an arranged and would not infringe on
her political quest.

------

American faces execution in Malaysia

   KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia (UPI) - The trial of the first American to
be charged with drug trafficking under Malaysia's harsh anti-narcotics
law was delayed Monday as the judge considered whether to strike a key
piece of prosecution evidence.
   Kerry Lane Wiley, 38, a computer specialist from Sacramento,
Calif., faces the death sentence if convicted. He appeared calm as
defense attorney Shafee Abdullah asked the court to hold as inadmissable
evidence that Wiley had admitted ownership of the drug, because he had
not been informed of his rights at the time of his arrest.
   The request came after prosecution witness Zainal Mulid told the
court Wiley had admitted owning a parcel containing marijuana which he
delivered to Wiley's home near Kuala Lumpur last November.
   Postal officials had already been alerted by the customs department
that the parcel contained marijuana, which Wiley had allegedly posted to
himself from Thailand.
   Zainal, a customs official, accompanied the postman when the parcel
was handed to Wiley at his home in the suburbs of Kuala Lumpur.
   Zainal gave evidence he returned with four customs officers half an
hour later and raided the house. They discovered a bag in the storeroom
beneath the stairs which contained several items of clothing and several
tins containing dried leaves.
   Wiley is the first American to be charged under statutes which
mandate the death sentence for anyone caught with half an ounce or more
of heroin, 2 pounds of opium or 6.4 ounces of marijuana.
   Malaysia first introduced the death penalty for drug offenses in
1975 as an option for judges sentencing convicted traffickers. The
government amended the law in 1983 to make it mandatory for all
traffickers to be sent to the gallows.

				    -6-

   Since 1975, more than 100 people have been executed, including 27
foreigners, the most recent being eight Hong Kong citizens who were
hanged in May.

------

Cuba looks inward for help in financial crunch
By MICHAEL MOLINSKI

   SAN CRISTOBAL, Cuba (UPI) - President Fidel Castro is placing his
trust in pigs, chickens and a farmer named Ramon to pull Cuba through an
economic crisis sparked by a reduction in crucial aid from the Soviet
Union.
   The El Mango farm, about 50 miles west of Havana, is putting to
practical use the economic policies Castro's government is counting on
to get it through a ``special period'' of austerity.
   The policy is to look inward and prepare for complete isolation by
recycling and reusing everything.
   At El Mango, that means big changes for 44-year-old farmer Ramon
Cabrera and his son.
   Charcoal made from recycled wood is now used to power the tractors
through a special device hooked to the gasoline engine. Corn and sugar
stalks are used for paper and other items. Parts of the stalks and corn
not fit for human consumption is used in a new form of pig and chicken
feed controlled and allocated by the government.
   Virtually every part of the pig and every part of the chicken are
in turn used for various purposes - from industrial chemicals made from
pigskin to sealants made from egg shells. The excrement of the pigs is
in turn used to feed the fish in El Mango's pond, which in turn are fed
to humans. The excrement also goes back into the fields as fertilizer,
completing the chain that Castro hopes to perfect.
   A popular saying that Castro has drilled into the local mentality
is, ``Food for animals means food for humans.''
   These are only a few of the drastic changes Castro has been
implementing in the economy in recent months.
   Cuba is even experimenting with using pig excrement to power
engines, said Cabrera, who for the past 24 years has worked on the El
Mango farm.
   With a straw hat and no shirt, exposing a beer belly that hung over
his belt, Cabrera and his son go about their tasks on a sunny afternoon
of feeding the pigs, tending the fields, feeding the fish and oiling the
tractors.
   ``I'd rather be here than at home,'' Cabrera said proudly.
   Before about two months ago, El Mango looked and functioned like
any small Midwest farm of about 50 years ago. Now, methods designed to
improve efficiency have given rise to new, concrete pig and chicken
coops, and new irrigation systems fed by a charcoal-powered water pump.
   ``Out here, everyone works the same,'' said Cabrera, who is paid
the equivalent of about $40 a month, plus rations of food and clothing.
   Cabrera says the pig feed, which he calls ``Creole grain,'' has
near miraculous qualities that - as government officials have told him -

				    -7-

not only improve the quality of the meat, but also the quality of the
excrement, ``which is very important.''
   If discontent ever forces Castro out of power, it is not likely to
originate from the rural population.
   ``People out here talk of hard times, but they never speak
disfavorably of the Marxist system,'' said April Cotte, a U.S. college
student who recently spent two weeks doing church work on farms in rural
Cuba. ``People in the cities of higher intelligence levels are the ones
who talk of discontent.''
   At another nearby farm, administrator Orlando Perez Rodriguez toes
the government line.
   ``The country is in a crisis right now,'' he said, echoing a recent
speech by Castro. ``We don't have a lot of oil. We are going through a
special period. We have to prepare. We can expect isolation. The only
ones Cubans will rely on are other Cubans. We will be even stronger.''
   In the center of San Cristobal, the government has ``recycled'' a
local high school into a part-time exhibit of the ``special period''
preparations.
   Charts point to the 1,024,200 rifles that are being turned into
7,400 pieces of optical equipment. A lobster shell is tacked to a wall
above a piece of paper that tells how it will be ground into food
proteins and chemicals. Dental fillings will be ground into silver and
used in paint and electronics. Used oil pipes and railroad track will be
used to construct pig and chicken houses. Seeds from the higuereta tree
will be used for brake fluid. Factories will be made from old ships.
   Many of the programs are already under way. Others are still being
planned.
   At the entrance to the exhibition, a 10-feet-tall sign displays a
quote by Castro: ``We have to compete with our own products, with the
quality that exists here to develop local crafts industries to offer the
maximum quality for all that the tourist wants to buy.''
   Boosting the tourism industry is also part of the plan for the
special period.
   Will it all work?
   ``It's a survival economy,'' said one diplomat, pointing to the
recent cuts in Soviet aid. ``Castro is stockpiling. I think the economy
could go downhill very, very fast, and that is when (the government)
will crack.''
   Others were less drastic.
   ``One wouldn't want to predict the fall of the regime over the next
year or two, but for the first time, the regime's invulnerability is
being questioned,'' another diplomat said.
   With the end of the Cold War, the Cuban government ``has lost the
major justification for austerity and the police state that exist here.
All (Castro) has left to maintain the regime is the remaining
nationalism,'' the diplomat said.

------

Turkey closes Iraqi pipelines
By ADAM KELLIHER

				    -8-

United Press International

   Iraqi President Saddam Hussein faced crippling economic sanctions
and an awsome gathering of international military might with defiance
Tuesday, saying his country will fight for ``Arab muscle and Arab
honor.''
   The White House refused to comment on news reports that members of
the 82nd Airborne Division would be deployed to Saudi Arabia, which was
sending troops to its border with occupied Kuwait to counter a feared
attack by Iraqi troops.
   U.S., Soviet and French ships steamed toward the region, displaying
an unprecidented united front.
   Saddam challenged the global trade embargo and military buildup
with a warning that he would ``confront any imperialist, Zionist
attack'' against his forces massed on Iraqi-occupied Kuwait's border
with Saudi Arabia.
   In a statement in Saddam's name read in Baghdad, Iraq, and
translated by Cable News Network in Amman, Jordan, the Iraqi president
defended his conquest of Kuwait, exalting his country as ``a most
honorable country which fights for the Arab muscle and Arab honor.
   But in an apparent gesture to ease fears that Iraq had taken
Western hostages, Baghdad said it was considering freeing about 400
foreigners seized in Kuwait.
   The State Department said 39 Americans, including 11 oil workers in
Iraqi custody since the invasion Thursday, and U.S. citizens taken from
three hotels in Kuwait city were being held in a Baghdad hotel and told
they were not allowed to leave.
   There have been no indications of any mistreatment of the
foreigners, nor any signs that they are being held hostage.
   In keeping with the overwhelming U.N. Security Council decision
Monday to impose tough sanctions against Iraq - five days after the
world body condemned the invasion and demanded that Iraq pull its forces
from Kuwait - Turkey said it closed two Iraqi pipelines passing through
its territory.
   Turkish President Turgut Ozal said in an interview with CBS News,
``The Turkish ... pipeline is not giving any drop of oil to the
tankers.''
   However, the nation's oil minister later clafified that Turkey
would not close the pipeline, but would instead store Iraqi oil and
block it from leaving the country.
   The twin pipelines, running about 700 miles from the Kirkuk
oilfields in northern Iraq to a Mediterranean terminal at Yumurtalik,
transported about 1.5 million barrels of Iraqi oil a day.
   The United States hopes an oil embargo on Iraq engineered by
closing the Turkish and Saudi pipelines will compel Saddam to leave
Kuwait.
   But the official Iraqi News Agency quoted a government spokesman as
saying, ``We do not believe that Saudi Arabia would cut the flow of oil
through its territory because such a measure would seriously harm
Iraq.''
   Iraq and Saudi Arabia have a non-aggression pact, and most analysts

				    -9-

believe closing the pipeline in Saudi Arabia would be construed as a
declaration of war.
   To prevent Iraqi military action beyond Kuwait, the United States
has mounted a formidable naval presence and boosted its military
readiness in the Persian Gulf region.
   The Soviet Union and France bolstered their naval forces in the
region. Even Switzerland broke its long tradition of neutrality and said
it would support the U.N. sanctions.
   President Bush summoned Cabinet members to the White House and
maintained contacts with allied leaders as Defense Secretary Dick Cheney
headed home after talks with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak for talks
apparently aimed at mustering support for mounting U.S. pressure against
Iraq.
   Cheney met Saudi King Fahd on Monday with a key goal of persuading
the monarch to allow U.S. troops on Saudi soil, should military action
be decided against Iraq.
   Although White House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said reports
of a possible naval blockade of Iraq were premature, Western leaders
said continued Iraqi intransigence could lead to such a move.
   In Baghdad, Saddam met Lt. Col. Alaa Hussein, the prime minister
and military commander of the ``provisional free Kuwait government,''
which was installed by Iraq after it overthrew the Kuwaiti leadership.
``Kuwait and Iraq share the same destiny,'' Alaa was quoted by the Iraqi
News Agency as saying.
   The news agency said Saddam assured Alaa that ``Iraq will confront
any imperialist, Zionist attack against the Kuwaiti uprising,''
referring to a rebellion Iraq claims it had to intervene to support.
   Iraqi media also reported that a flood of volunteers across Iraq
had led to the creation of 25 new military divisions - about 250,000 men
- to prop up the provisional government believed made up of Iraqi
military officers.
   Before the invasion, Iraq was estimated to have a 1 million-strong
battle-tested military and about 700,000 reserves.

------

ANC puts pressure on de Klerk to rein in troops
By JACK REED

   JOHANNESBURG, South Africa (UPI) - Religious and human rights
leaders closed ranks with the African National Congress Tuesday, warning
President Frederik de Klerk that failure to keep a grip on his security
forces endangers a breakthrough in peace talks.
   Less than 24 hours after announcing a suspension of its 29-year
limited guerrilla war against white rule, the ANC also cautioned the
international community that other forms of pressure, including economic
sanctions, must be maintained against Pretoria to ensure the seemingly
unstoppable reform process remains on track.
   ANC leader Nelson Mandela proposed the suspension - perhaps his
most important trump card - in the opening minutes of Monday's 15-hour
meeting with government negotiators headed by de Klerk, members of the

				    -10-

ANC team said.
   Mandela told de Klerk the suspension hinged on agreement on a
timetable for the release of 1,500 political prisoners, the return of
20,000 exiles and ANC participation in working groups supervising other
key reforms, among them altering contentious security laws.
   The government agreed, placing the ANC in an unprecedented and
close working relationship with Pretoria that de Klerk's right-wing
critics condemned Tuesday. Conservative Party leader Andries Treurnicht
called the accord ``untenable and illegal'' and said a ``dual power''
arrangement was emerging in South Africa.
   ``We went there to break the logjam in the peace process,'' said
South African Communist Party General Secretary Joe Slovo, a member of
the ANC team, ``and I believe we walked away with complete success in
that direction.''
   ``Right at the beginning our deputy president (Mandela) made the
point that time was not on our side, that the longer the process
stretches out the more time will be given to those who would like to
sabotage the process and prevent its success,'' he said.
   The agreement is expected to result in the phased release of
political prisoners starting Sept. 1 and the return of exiles a month
later. An April 30, 1990, deadline was set for the entire process.
   Despite heralding the breakthrough, which cleared away most
obstacles to formal negotiations on a new constitution, the ANC,
religious leaders and human rights organizations warned de Klerk Tuesday
to halt abuses by the army and police.
   The security forces stand accused of lagging far behind the
president in accepting a power-sharing deal between South Africa's 5
million whites and 28 million blacks. Charges range from using excessive
force on anti-government protests and torture of detainees to openly
backing the ANC's rival Zulu movement Inkatha in bloody clashes in Natal
province.
   ``It's a Frankenstein which has been created and inherited by a
racist set-up,'' Slovo told a news conference, noting the ANC ``reserves
the right'' to resume the armed struggle ``should the government fail to
carry out its undertakings.''
   ``One of the urgent and primary tasks which faces de Klerk... is to
tame and control the activities of the police force,'' he said. ``His
police force is part of the problem and not part of the solution.''
   The 72-year-old Mandela publicly warned de Klerk in a 1 a.m.
nationally televised news conference that the ANC's decision was a
``significant concession'' offered despite the government's failure to
bring ``state violence'' under control.
   ``A grave responsibility lies on the de Klerk government now to
stop all forms of state violence, particularly that of the police and
the army,'' South African Council of Churches General Secretary Frank
Chikane said in a statement Tuesday.
   ANC officials announced Tuesday that de Klerk had agreed to talks
later this month with the ANC and other linked movements locked in
battle with Inkatha on new initiatives to end the conflict, which has
claimed more than 3,000 lives since 1987 in Natal province.
   Since the release of Mandela from 27 years imprisonment in

				    -11-

February, the ANC has been under mounting pressure to suspend its armed
struggle to demonstrate its commitment to a peaceful end to the
country'S armed struggle. At the same time, the suspension is expected
to give de Klerk ammunition against his right-wing critics.
   The demand has dogged Mandela on his foreign tours, most recently
in the United States, where President Bush urged an end to the armed
struggle.
   Tuesday in Pretoria, Lawyers for Human Rights applauded the ANC's
decision and declared state-inspired violence as the ``gravest threat to
the prospects of a peaceful and negotiated settlement in South Africa.''

------

Soviet ships head for Persian Gulf
By JAMES ROSEN

   MOSCOW (UPI) - A Foreign Ministry official confirmed Tuesday that
two Soviet warships were heading for the Persian Gulf, but said Moscow
did not ``want to flex any muscles'' in the conflict over Iraq's
invasion of Kuwait.
   Soviet commentators said Iraq's ``plundering'' of its neighbor
Kuwait forced Moscow to stop arms exports to its longtime ally and speak
out against Baghdad.
   Foreign Ministry spokesman Yuri Grimitskikh confirmed reports from
Washington that Soviet troops were on their way to the Persian Gulf
aboard two ships steaming toward the site of conflict.
   Grimitskikh said political means should be used instead of force to
persuade Iraq to end its Kuwaiti incursion.
   ``We don't want to flex any muscles,'' he said.
   Deputy Foreign Minister Alexander Belonogov said the Soviet Union
would scrupulously observe the U.N. Security Council's decision Monday
to impose full trade and economic sanctions against Iraq.
   ``Appropriate conclusions will be drawn from this, and I do not
doubt that the Soviet agencies through which cooperation (with Iraq) was
maintained will take the necessary measures,'' he said.
   Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and Secretary of State
James Baker condemned the invasion in an unprecedented joint statement
last Friday, a day after Iraqi troops poured into Kuwait. Moscow also
cut off all shipments of weapons to Iraq, its largest buyer.
   Political analyst Yuri Glukhov, writing in the Communist Party
newspaper, Pravda, said it was difficult for Moscow to act against a
friend.
   ``Considering the good-neighborly relations of long standing with
this country, the decision to take such sanctions did not come easy for
us,'' he said. ``In the most difficult times for Iraq, we took its side.
But it is one thing to participate in defending, another - in
plundering.''
   The Leninskoye Znamya newspaper said: ``The present conflict is all
the more unpleasant for us as it involves two states with which we have
maintained friendly relations. As for Iraq, those relations went so deep
that a treaty on friendship and cooperation was concluded between our

				    -12-

two countries.''
   Glukhov said that the Iraqi government of President Saddam Hussein
badly miscalculated in going into Kuwait because of disputes over
territory and oil prices.
   ``I don't know how carefully Baghdad considered its huge losses in
this essentially adventurist step,'' Glukhov said. ``Illusory ideas of
an easy and almost bloodless victory over a weak neighbor prevailed. As
to their military aspect, these ideas were not groundless.
   ``But in its political aspects this may prove to be a Pyrrhic
victory.''
   The Pravda analyst said that with the invasion of Kuwait, Iraq
added another border crisis to its already-strained ties with
neighboring Syria and Iran, with whom it fought an eight-year war that
formally ended in 1988.

------

Bulgarian government resigns

   SOFIA, Bulgaria (UPI) - Prime Minister Andrei Loukanov handed in
his government's resignation Tuesday in a planned move to clear the way
for the formation of Bulgaria's first democratically elected Cabinet in
four decades.
   The resignation, which had been expected, comes nearly two months
after the former Communist Party - now known as the Socialists - won an
absolute majority in the Parliament in the country's first true
elections since the communists took power in 1944.
   The official news agency BTA said Loukanov formally presented his
government's resignation to the Grand National Assembly but was expected
to stay on to form a new Cabinet.
   ``The Grand National Assembly will probably entrust him with the
leadership of the same Cabinet, which will stay in office until a new
Cabinet is formed,'' BTA said.
   Loukanov, a Socialist, has pledged to include members of the
democratic opposition in a broad-based coalition government that would
present a united front against Bulgaria's worsening economic crisis.
   Members of the main opposition party, the Union Democratic Forces,
have warmed up to the idea a Socialist-UDF coalition after last week's
election of UDF leader Zhelyu Zhelev as Bulgarian president.
   The current Cabinet, made up entirely of Socialists, was formed
Feb. 8 following a Communist Party congress that put the party firmly in
the hands of its reformist wing.
   Loukanov was a member of a moderate faction that ousted hard-line
leader Todor Zhivkov Nov. 10, ending 35 years of autocratic rule.

------

Ex-lawmakers barred from leaving Pakistan
By DENHOLM BARNETSON

   ISLAMABAD, Pakistan (UPI) - Officials of Benazir Bhutto's Pakistan

				    -13-

People's Party went into hiding Tuesday to evade arrest after her
government's dismissal and authorities ordered airports to stop some
former legislators from leaving the country, sources said.
   Bhutto, meanwhile, met with aides to discuss President Ghulam Ishaq
Khan's actions Monday in dismissing her 20-month-old government,
dissolving the National Assembly and declaring a state of emergency.
   A spokesman said Bhutto was likely to fly to the family home in the
southern port of Karachi, contradicting reports she had been placed
under house arrest.
   There was no indication that a curfew had been imposed anywhere in
the South Asian nation. Islamabad was calm Tuesday.
   Ishaq Khan said he had fired the government because of its
``corruption and nepotism'' and its failure to control escalating ethnic
violence.
   In a further sign of upheaval, the legislative assemblies of all
four provinces have been dissolved, the official television reported
Tuesday.
   The 37-year-old Bhutto, in a statement after she met with her
aides, said the president had made ``old and hackneyed charges, which
have only one object - to undermine the will of the people.
   ``The PPP is not afraid to face these charges,'' she said. ``It is
confident that if elections are held as promised, on schedule, it shall
be vindicated in the court of the people.''
   Security sources said authorities had issued airports with the
names of a number of prominent people, including some PPP legislators,
who have been barred from leaving the country.
   Army contingents moved into the capital and took control of the
Pakistan television headquarters, Radio Pakistan, the Information
Ministry and several other government offices.
   Bhutto charged that ``anti-democratic elements'' had taken up a
caretaker status in the government.
   ``The partisan and blatant nature of these steps clearly betray the
game plan - which is to deny the PPP any role in the future,'' she said.
   The PPP central committee is to meet in Karachi during the next few
days to decide whether to petition the Supreme Court to declare Ishaq
Khan's decree unconstitutional.
   Ishaq Khan Monday appointed opposition leader Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi
to head an interim government until elections scheduled for Oct. 24. The
assemblies of all four provinces were also dissolved.
   A PPP spokesman said the state of emergency was imposed because ``a
grave emergency exists in which the security of Pakistan is threatened
by external aggression.'' The emergency gives authorities wide powers of
detention.
   PPP sources said a number of the party's leaders had gone into
hiding, fearing arrest.
   Reaction to the president's announcement was muted in most of the
country Tuesday. But in Karachi, supporters of the Mohajir Qaumi
Movement, a major opposition party representing Mohajir migrants from
India, danced and shouted ``Down with Benazir'' outside Bhutto's family
home in the southern port.
   The opposition party has alleged the Bhutto government failed to

				    -14-

protect the interests of its supporters, and Mohajir youths have clashed
frequently in southern Sind Province in recent months with members of
the PPP youth wing.
   Bhutto took office in November 1988 following the first democratic
elections in 11 years in Pakistan, which has been under military rule
for almost two-thirds of its 43-year existence.
   As the first woman leader of a mainly Islamic country, she had come
under fire for failing to control growing ethnic violence in Sind and
alleged corruption by members of her administration and family, charges
which have increased tensions with the army.
   Bhutto's PPP has also failed to pass any significant legislation
and there have been persistent and acrimonious disputes with the
opposition.
   Ishaq Khan was formerly chairman of the Senate and took office on
the death in a mysterious August 1988 plane crash of President Mohammad
Zia ul-Haq, who had ruled the country since overthrowing Bhutto's
father, Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, in a 1977 coup.
   The elder Bhutto was hanged two years later on charges of plotting
to murder a political opponent.
   International observers said the military was attempting to regain
control of Pakistan by having Bhutto dismissed.
   ``This is a constitutional coup instigated by Pakistani military
leaders through Ishaq Khan,'' said Sugota Bose, an expert on the region
from Tufts University in Massachusetts.

------

Liberian rebel demands outside help

   MONROVIA, Liberia (UPI) - A Liberian rebel leader holding an
American and at least seven other foreigners said he would attack
Marines protecting the U.S. Embassy unless a U.S. or West African
peace-keeping force intervenes to end the country's civil war.
   Prince Johnson, who leads a breakaway rebel faction, made the
threat Monday as heavy fighting was reported in the area near the U.S.
Embassy.
   The rebel also indicated he would keep the foreigners hostage until
peace-keeping forces arrive. The hostages, all taken by rebels loyal to
Johnson, included three Britons, two West Germans, a Dutchman, an
Argentinian and a U.S. mining contractor identified as Chris Mendes, 27,
of Sacramento, Calif.
   Sources within the Lebanese community said some of their nationals
also were taken hostage and the total number of hostages in the West
African country was believed to be as high as 16.
   The rebel leader, whose forces control about half of Monrovia,
Saturday declared his intention of taking hostages. He said at the time
he was giving international organizations two days to agree to send a
peace-keeping force into Liberia, which was founded in 1822 by former
U.S. black slaves.
   Johnson said he told his men to single out American, British,
Lebanese and Indian civilians for detention first. The hostages were

				    -15-

taken from the Luxory Hotel Africa on the city's outskirts and U.S.
State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said they were held in
the town of Calweld, near Monrovia.
   Johnson told reporters who visited him on Monday he had rounded up
the foreigners the previous night. But the hostages themselves said they
had only been arrested an hour before they were allowed to talk to the
news media.
   Johnson, speaking Monday to a crowd of 3,000 in rebel-held Bushrod
Island, said: ``What this country really needs is the peaceful
intervention of the United States or ECOWAS (Economic Community of West
African States).''
   ``If they don't intervene, I will attack the American Marines,''
said Johnson, whose group is a breakaway faction of the original rebel
force headed by Charles Taylor fighting to oust President Samuel Doe
from power over the country, which became a republic on July 26, 1847.
   Sunday, U.S. Marines were airlifted into the war-torn country and
evacuated 62 U.S. government employees, relatives and civilians, two
Italians, one Canadian and eight Liberians.
   The State Department said the ``drawdown'' of embassy staff was
successful and that 41 embassy personnel, including the U.S. ambassador,
would remain in Monrovia. A total of about 300 Americans remained in
Liberia,
   Monday, more than 200 Marines who stayed after the evacuation to
protect the embassy and its staff abandoned three roadblocks they had
set up near the embassy in the Mamba Point District of the capital. The
Marines moved to set up defensive positions inside the walled compound,
an embassy spokesman said.
   ``There is no need to expose people,'' the embassy spokesman said.
``Initially we didn't know what people's reaction was going to be.''
   The embassy has insisted the Marines will not intervene in the
civil war, despite repeated calls from many Liberians for them to do so.
   Soon after the Marines withdrew from the street, heavy fighting
broke out Monday in the embassy district within a few hundred yards of
the Marine positions. The fighting continued throughout Monday
afternoon, although control of the area remained in doubt.
   Tutwiler said all major stores remain closed. There was no public
water, electricity or phone service, and food shortages were worsening.
   Five West African presidents met Monday in the Gambian capital of
Banjul to discuss an ECOWAS peace plan for Liberia. A peace-keeping
force made up largely of Nigerian troops already was preparing to land
in the country.
   Johnson said Sunday night he ordered the execution of the former
Liberian minister for youth and sports, Senator Fred J. Blay. He claimed
Blay had been sent by Doe to spy on his headquarters and ordered that he
be shot by firing squad.
   A Liberian congressman, William T. Jasvan, was paraded before
reporters Monday and led away with his hands bound. Johnson said he also
would be executed for spying.

------


				    -16-

Gorbachev-Yeltsin alliance lauded
By JAMES ROSEN

   MOSCOW (UPI) - The Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda praised
Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin on Tuesday for setting aside their
political differences for the good of the country.
   Pravda hailed the radical Yeltsin despite his announcement at the
28th Communist Party Congress last month that he was leaving the party
to concentrate on his duties as Russian Federation president, the post
he gained May 30 in parliamentary elections.
   Gorbachev and Yeltsin showed ``a high sense of responsibility and
political flexibility'' with their decision last week to form a joint
working group of their two governments to develop a comprehensive
program that might deliver the Soviet Union from economic disaster.
   Pravda noted Gorbachev, the Soviet president, and Yeltsin overcame
a history of personal enmity in agreeing to join forces and launch a
combined assault on the vast country's stubborn economic problems.
   ``A further deepening of the economic crisis was practically
unavoidable without unity of action between the (Soviet) Union and
Russia,'' Pravda said. ``But hopes for effective interaction seemed
illusory. The load of accumulated contradictions, mutual grudges of the
leaders and inertia of confrontation was too heavy.''
   Gorbachev and Yeltsin had clashed repeatedly over the past two
years. As recently as late May, Gorbachev convened a secret meeting of
all Communist Party deputies in the Russian republic's new legislature
and urged them to vote against Yeltsin in the presidential polls.
   Gorbachev's bid to stop Yeltsin failed, however, and the Siberian's
election to the highest post in Russia 10 weeks ago forced state-run
Soviet television to lift a coverage ban on him that almost certainly
had Gorbachev's blessing.
   The news of a Gorbachev-Yeltsin alliance rocked Moscow, with some
Soviet analysts seeing it as a nod by Gorbachev to Yeltsin's growing
power and others saying the move could be a sly attempt by the Soviet
president to coopt a potential rival.
   The vying between the two men appeared to peak last month, Pravda
noted, when Yeltsin announced plans to take over control of all banks on
Russian territory, which makes up three-quarters of the Soviet Union.
   Yeltsin also developed a bold 500-day plan to privatize most
property and free nearly all prices in Russia, a more radical strategy
than that pursued by Soviet Premier Nikolai Ryzhkov.
   Gorbachev issued a decree last week splitting control of banks
between the Soviet central bank Gosbank and the 15 republics. In an even
bigger concession, he then agreed to co-chair with Yeltsin the joint
working group on the economy and use Yeltsin's program as a blueprint.
   ``It looks like by Sept. 1, 1990, the country will really have at
its disposal an elaborated, serious and complete document opening up
prospects for the radicalization of reform and the stabilization of the
economy,'' Pravda said.
   ``If the (Gorbachev-Yeltsin) political alliance ... remains firm,
one may hope that the serious political and economic handicaps sure to
arise on the way to its realization will be overcome,'' it said.

				    -17-

   Yeltsin, who left Monday for a three-week tour of his giant
republic, was fired as Moscow Communist Party chief in fall 1987 after
he said the pace of reform was too slow.
   Yeltsin made a dramatic political comeback, however, gaining
election to the U.S.S.R. Congress of People's Deputies in March 1989,
joining the standing Soviet Parliament two months later and finally
claiming the Russian presidency in May.

------

Another Lenin statue dismantled

   MOSCOW (UPI) - Lithuania's old capital of Kaunas has dismantled its
monument to Vladimir Lenin, and citizens in a major Ukrainian city
signed a petition to haul down their Lenin statue n a growing
repudiation of the Soviet state's founder.
   The official Tass news agency said the conservative faction of the
divided Lithuanian Communist Party protested Monday's dismantling of the
Lenin statue in Kaunas, an 11th-century city that was Lithuania's
capital when the Baltic nation was independent between the two world
wars.
   In Lvov, an industrial city of 742,000 people in the rebellious
western Ukraine, anti-Communists are collecting signatures on a petition
to pull down its statue to Lenin, who instituted Communist rule in
Russia in November 1917, the independent Interfax news service said.
   Two smaller western Ukrainian towns, Chervonograd and Sosnovka,
took Lenin off the pedestals in their main squares last week. Another
city in the Ukraine, Ternopol, has decided to dismantle its Lenin
monument.
   The mounting assault on Lenin got the go-ahead when the Soviet
Communist Party's 28th Congress said in its platform last month that he
was just one many great socialist thinkers such as Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels.
   The dethroning of Leninism-Marxism as the ruling ideology in the
vast country set off demands for Lenin memorials to be pulled down.
   At the two sessions of the Congress of People's Deputies last year
and a third in March, some deputies suggested Lenin be taken out of the
mausoleum in Red Square and buried.
   Lenin, who died Jan. 21, 1924, was embalmed and placed in the
mausoleum on the orders of his successor, Josef Stalin.

------

U.S. sending troops to Saudi Arabia

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - The United States was preparing to send U.S.
ground troops and combat aircraft Tuesday night to Saudi Arabia to help
Saudi forces defend against a possible Iraqi attack, CBS News reported.
   The White House and the Pentagon declined to confirm or deny the
report.
   White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the United States would

				    -18-

not send U.S. forces without a Saudi invitation - one of the requests
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney made in Saudi Arabia Monday during a
meeting with King Fahd.
   ``I have no comment on any military movements,'' Fitzwater said.
``I won't confirm or deny any military movements.''
   CBS said elements of the 82nd Airborne at Fort Bragg, N.C., were on
the runway and would be sent Tuesday night on a flight to Saudi Arabia.
The 101st Airborne at Fort Campbell, Ky., may also be sent.
   Bush was reported to be on the phone talking to U.S. allies about
the plans.
   The president earlier told a Cabinet meeting ``that he viewed the
Iraqi troops lined up in Kuwait facing Saudi Arabia as a threat to the
United States security interests,'' Fitzwater said.
   ``That has been our message to Saudi Arabia and we believe that
they understand that, and are appreciative of that statement.''
   He said of the Iraqi presence near the border: ``We do have
information showing that the Iraqi forces are there in considerable
quantity and they are in an offensive posture and we believe there is an
imminent threat to Saudi Arabia from the way that they are positioned
and located in Kuwait.''
   Fitzwater added, ``There have been changes of a sort that cause us
to believe there is a growing and continuing threat.''

------

A look at U.S. Navy forces in Middle East

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Here are the names and types of the major U.S.
warships in the eastern Mediterranean Sea and Persian Gulf region:
(Eastern Mediterranean - Eisenhower battle group, 13 ships)
   USS Dwight D. Eisenhower, Nimitz-class, nuclear-powered aircraft
carrier
   USS Ticonderoga, guided-missile cruiser (with AEGIS air defense
system)
   USS Scott, guided-missile destroyer
   USS Tattnall, guided-missile destroyer
   USS Peterson, destroyer
   USS John L. Hall, guided-missile frigate
   USS Paul, frigate
   Oilers, ammunition ships, etc.
---
(Northern Arabian Sea - Independence battle group, 13 ships)
   USS Independence, Forrestal-class aircraft carrier
   USS Antietam, guided-missile cruiser(AEGIS equipped)
   USS Jouett, guided-missile cruiser
   USS Goldsborough, guided-missile destroyer
   USS Brewton, frigate
   USS Reasoner, frigate
   Oilers, ammunition ships, etc.
---
(Joint Task Force-Middle East in Persian Gulf, 8 ships)

				    -19-

   USS LaSalle, command ship
   Guided-missile cruiser (not identified)
   Destroyer (not identified)
   USS Robert G. Bradley, guided-missile frigate
   USS Taylor, guided-missile frigate
   frigate (not identified)
   frigate (not identified)
   frigate (not identified)
---
 (On way to Mediterranean - Saratoga battle group, 15 ships)
   USS Saratoga, Forrestal-class aircraft carrier
   USS Wisconsin, battleship
   USS Philippine Sea, guided-missile cruiser (AEGIS equipped)
   USS Biddle, guided-missile cruiser
   USS Sampson, guided-missile destroyer
   USS Spruance, destroyer
   USS Elmer Montgomery, frigate
   USS Thomas C. Hart, frigate
   USS Detroit, fast combat ship
   Oilers, ammunition ship, etc.
Mediterranean Amphibious Group - 2,100 combat Marines
   USS Inchon, amphibious assault ship
   USS Nashville, amphibious transport ship
   USS Whidbey Island, dock landing ship
   USS Newport, tank landing ship
   USS Fairfax County, tank landing ship

------

Stark sends Sullivan letter of apology
By JANET BASS

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Rep. Fortney ``Pete'' Stark, D-Calif.,
apologized to Health Secretary Louis Sullivan in an Aug. 6 letter for
calling the black Cabinet member a disgrace to his race, saying the
comments were ``indefensible.''
   The letter, marked personal but obtained by United Press
International Tuesday, comes several days after Sullivan demanded an
apology from Stark, a white liberal representing Oakland, Calif.
   ``I apologize to you for the inaccurate, inept, indefensible and
totally uncalled-for remarks regarding you as a human and as a
professional. On both counts, you stand above reproach. I hope you can
accept my apology,'' Stark said.
   During a photo session before a Tuesday meeting with Jesse Jackson,
Sullivan said he accepted the apology and considered the matter closed.
   ``It was unfortunate, and I now hope we can move on to productive
uses of our time to address the health and social services of our
citizens. That's why we're here,'' Sullivan said.
   ``Suffice it to say, we were all embarrassed and humiliated by the
statement of Congressman Stark,'' Jackson said. ``I hope it was just a
bad day for Congressman Stark.''

				    -20-

   Jackson said he was meeting with Sullivan for a general discussion
on the health needs of the black community.
   The brouhaha started at the end of a news conference last Thursday,
when Stark said he thought Sullivan, a physician, was a ``disgrace to
his profession and his race'' by opposing abortion funds for the poor
and national health insurance.
   Sullivan immediately demanded an apology, setting off a debate
between the men in newspapers and on the airwaves.
   Sullivan called the remarks racist and said, ``I don't live on Pete
Stark's plantation'' and that ``ultra-liberals'' should learn to accept
the ``independent thinking'' of blacks.
   Stark then responded that Sullivan indeed ``doesn't live on my
plantation. He lives on (White House chief of staff) John Sununu's
plantation.'' Stark accused Sullivan of reversing personal views to
conform with those of the Bush administration.
   On the House floor Friday, after demands for an apology from
various Republican members, Stark only said he ``blew it (by injecting
race in the discussion) ... because it obscures the fact that he is
carrying on a bankrupt policy for an administration who inadvertently
has been impacting the poor and the minorities in this country by
denying them decent medical care.''
   Sullivan raised the issue later Tuesday during an address to the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference in Richmond, emphasizing the
need for a diversity of views, even among the black community.
   ``This diversity is one of our strengths, and we don't need other
people to tell us what to think. We certainly don't need others to judge
the `correctness' of our thinking. That kind of paternalism is what this
organization has fought for many years, and continues to fight,''
Sullivan said.
   The secretary said the ``struggle for freedom and justice must
include improving the health of black Americans.''
   He said ``everyone should be able to obtain necessary health care''
but that national health insurance is the wrong way to achieve that
goal.

------

Barry jurors send note to judge

   (WASHINGTON) - The jury in the trial of Mayor Marion Barry today
sent a note to U-S District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson... asking if
one of the government witnesses in the case had an agreement to testify.
   Judge Jackson sent the jurors a note back saying there was NO
``written agreement'' between government witness Darrell Sabbs and
prosecutors that could have prompted his testimony.
   Sabbs... a friend of Barry's for two decades... testified he used
cocaine with Barry at least five times from 1986 to 1989.
   But the testimony that was most important was his statement that he
used cocaine with Barry on the date charged in Count 11... one of the 10
misdemeanor cocaine possession counts facing Barry.
   The jury's question could be important because the government

				    -21-

acknowledged that many of its other witnesses testified under plea
agreements or with grants of immunity.
   The jury is in its fifth day of deliberations in an attempt to
reach a verdict on 14 cocaine and perjury charges.
   The jury... which has been sequestered for eight weeks... met for
nearly eight hours yesterday without reaching a verdict and returned to
the jury room at about nine-30 this morning.

------

1989 state tax revenues increase
By VINCENT DEL GIUDICE
UPI Business Writer

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - State tax revenues increased 7.5 percent in 1989
to $284 billion from $264 billion in 1988, the Commerce Department said
Tuesday, in part reflecting fewer dollars from the federal government.
   General sales and gross receipts taxes, the largest source of state
tax revenue, were up 7.3 percent last year to $93.4 billion, according
to the report by the department's Census Bureau.
   Individual state income taxes increased 10.7 percent, from 1988 to
1989, to $88.7 billion, while corporate net income taxes rose 10.4
percent to $23.9 billion, the department said.
   ``The federal government has played a more limited role in recent
years,'' said Robert Dederick, chief economist at Northern Trust in
Chicago. ``States have had to take care of themselves more.''
   States have also had to meet greater needs as their tax bases grow,
grapple with spirling education costs, struggle to preserve the
environment, and in many cases repair long-neglected roads, bridges and
highways.
   In 1989, Oregon and California led the union with revenue gains of
22.5 percent and 14.2 percent, respectively, followed by Delaware at
13.4 percent, Alaska at 12.7 percent and Idaho at 11.5 percent.
   But two states reported declines - Utah was off by a huge 11.4
percent, and South Dakota dipped 1.7 percent.
   The Commerce Department also said that more than half of the state
tax revenues were collected in nine states: California, $41.2 billion;
New York, $26.6 billion; Texas, $14 billion; Pennsylvania, $12.6
billion; Florida $12.5 billion; Illinois, $11.8 billion; Michigan, $11.1
billion; Ohio, $10.8 billion; and New Jersey, $10.5 billion.
   State taxes are currently deductible from federal income taxes.
   But last month, the Bush administration floated a deficit reduction
plan that included limiting to $10,000 the total amount of state and
local taxes that could be deducted from the federal taxes. Currently,
there is no limit.
   The administration proposal, which caused an uproar among state and
municipal officials, would affect primarily wealthier Americans making
more than $100,000 a year.

------


				    -22-

MALDEF urges public support for civil rights efforts
By RENEE HAINES

   SAN ANTONIO (UPI) - A national Hispanic rights group, condemning
efforts to label the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1990 a ``quota bill,''
Tuesday urged that the public lobby Congress to adopt the measure
without watering it down first.
   The Senate and House already have adopted similar versions of the
bill the Bush Administration has deplored as a mere ``quota bill''
disguised as civil rights legislation. The measure now will be
considered by a conference committee to consider any compromises.
   ``It is not a quota bill,'' Guadalupe Luna, staff attorney of the
San Antonio-based Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund,
said about proposed legislation that contains no references to setting
any quotas.
   Luna said all the bill seeks to do is reverse the effects of
several recent Supreme Court decisions that weakened existing civil
rights rules. Those decisions, among other things, will make it more
difficult for victims to prove discrimination in court.
   ``What the Supreme Court did last June was reverse 28 years of
well-established law,'' she said, adding that no rush to establish
quotas had occurred in all those years under the civil rights
protections she and others want restored.
   The House approved the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1990 on Friday
following the Senate's endorsement of its version July 19.
   But Luna said a compromise measure must be approved by December.
   ``Civil rights laws cannot be helped without the help of the
community. I have to go to the communty and ask them to write letters,''
Luna said. ``If this bill isn't signed by December ... we'll have to
start all over again.''
   While the Senate version contains no reference to quotas, she said,
the House version goes further to specifically state no quotas will be
required.
   MALDEF spokesman Judith Sanders-Castro said the Bush Administration
has raised the ``quota'' issue as a ploy to divide the nation's workers
in an attempt to bring about the defeat of the bill.
   ``It is an attempt to pit working people against each other.
They're trying to convince Anglos ... they will be losing jobs to
(minorities). That is not going to happen,'' Sanders-Castro said.

------

Yeutter to visit Asia

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Agriculture Secretary Clayton Yeutter will spend
two weeks in meetings with agricultural leaders of four Asian nations,
including time in Japan to urge it to open its markets to U.S. rice, it
was announced Tuesday.
   The trip to Thailand, Malaysia, Hong Kong and Japan will be devoted
to discussions of world trade reform, the new farm policy law being
written by Congress and other agricultural issues.

				    -23-

   Yeutter was scheduled to depart Thursday for Japan to begin the
tour. The U.S. rice industry gave Yeutter two symbolic bags of rice to
carry on the trip to Japan. The island nation bars virtually all imports
of foreign rice.
   U.S. trade officials twice have rejected rice industry complaints
against Japan in favor of making reform of its rice policies a part of
world trade talks. Those negotiations are due to conclude in December.
   Officials said Yeutter would be in Bangkok, Thailand, Aug. 12-14,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Aug. 15-16, Hong Kong Aug. 16-17, and Tokyo Aug.
17-23.
   Asia buys 40 percent of U.S. agricultural exports. Japan is the No.
1 customer for U.S. farm goods and is forecast to buy $8.3 billion worth
of them this fiscal year.

------

Bush sets trip to Denver in September

    WASHINGTON (UPI) - Although he delayed a Latin American trip to be
on hand for budget talks, President Bush still plans to spend at least
eight days on the campaign trail during September, including a trip to
Colorado, the White House said Monday.
    Press secretary Marlin Fitzwater confirmed that Bush had postponed
the planned trip Sept. 16-21 to Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay
and Chile ``based on the need to be personally involved in the budget
negotiations in September.''
    At the same time, the spokesman announced a rigorous campaign
schedule for the president that will take him to more than a dozen
cities on behalf of at least eight Republican candidates.
    On Sept. 11, Bush will fly first to Denver for a fund-raiser for
the Hank Brown for Senate campaign, and then to Los Angeles for a
fund-raiser for Sen. Pete Wilson, who faces a tough race for governor
against former San Francisco Mayor Dianne Feinstein. Bush travels Sept.
12 to San Francisco for another fund-raiser on Wilson's behalf.
    On Sept. 3, Bush will return from a 25-day vacation in
Kennebunkport, Maine. The continuing negotiations with congressional
leaders on the fiscal 1991 budget and reducing the budget deficit are
tentatively set to resume that week.
    By law, failure to reach an agreement would force the government
to impose an estimated $100 billion in across the board cuts in vital
services on Sept. 30.
    But the president, as evidenced by the schedule announced Monday,
will also be fairly preoccupied with campaigning for Republican
candidates in the November elections.
    According to Fitzwater, Bush also plans trips:
    -Sept. 6, to Topeka, Kan., and Tallahassee, Fla., to attend
fund-raisers for Kansas Gov. Mike Hayden, who faces a tough re-election
primary on Tuesday, and Rep. Bill Grant of Florida, who recently
switched to the GOP.
    -Sept. 9, to New York for a dedication ceremony at Ellis Island.
    -Sept. 26-27, starting in Akron, Ohio, on behalf of George

				    -24-

Voinovich, former mayor of Cleveland who is running for governor,
heading next to Chicago for Rep. Lynn Martin, who is running for the
Senate. The next day, he will attend a fund-raiser in Minneapolis for
whoever wins the Independent-Republican gubernatorial primary, head next
to Cleveland on behalf of Voinovich again before a final stop in Detroit
for unidentified Michigan GOP candidates.
    In addition, Bush will travel to New York Sept. 30, as previously
announced, to attend an international summit on children. The following
day, Oct. 1, he is to address the United Nations General Assembly.

------

White House says talk of naval blockade premature
BY HELEN THOMAS
UPI White House Reporter

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - President Bush summoned Cabinet members to the
White House Tuesday for an update on the Persian Gulf crisis and White
House press secretary Marlin Fitzwater said reports of a possible naval
blockade of Iraq are ``premature.''
   ``We have the sanctions in place,'' Fitzwater told reporters,
referring to the overwhelming vote Monday by the U.N. Security Council
for a tough economic boycott against Iraq for its invasion of
neighboring oil-rich Kuwait. ``We expect that to happen,'' Fitzwater
added, saying, ``This blockade talk is premature.''
   However, if the embargo fails to be effective, Western leaders,
including British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and Canadian Prime
Minister Brian Mulroney said they expected continued intransigence by
Iraq could lead to a military blockade.
   Bush called for ``full and total implementation'' of Monday's U.N.
Security Council decision to impose an economic and military embargo on
Iraq.
   Bush said the U.N. embargo, adopted by a 13-0 vote, ``gives an
awful lot of muscle to countries and we want to see them use it. ...
Certainly petroleum is considered under that definition, subject to
being cut off.''
   On Monday, following a meeting with Bush, Mulroney, Thatcher and
NATO Secretary General Manfred Woerner all praised the U.N. Security
Council decision.
   Asked if he thought a blockade would be necessary, Mulroney said,
``If you look at the geography, it certainly wouldn't hurt at all.''
   Thatcher added that if the sanctions were not effective, a blockade
would be considered. ``If not, we shall ... have to jointly consider
collective action of the kind of thing such as a blockade.''
   Bush said Monday he was ``ruling out nothing at all'' in
considering his next moves.
   Bush has received a full report on a meeting U.S. Charge d'Affairs
Joseph Wilson had with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in Baghdad Monday.
   Fitzwater declined to reveal any details of Saddam's message to
Bush. The Washington Post reported Tuesday that Saddam told the U.S.
diplomat that Kuwait now belongs to Iraq and there was no going back.

				    -25-

The Post quoted a U.S. official as characterizing Saddam's message as:
``It's a done deal.''
   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney visited Monday with Saudi officials
with a key goal of persuading King Fahd to allow U.S. personnel on Saudi
soil in light of Iraq's invasion of oil-rich Kuwait. The outcome of the
meeting remained unclear.
   On Tuesday, Cheney flew to Egypt to meet with President Hosni
Mubarak in the seaport city of Alexandria. Mubarak's government is
allied with Iraq but has denounced the invasion through the 21-nation
Arab League.
   There were reports that Egyptian and Moroccan forces were being
sent to Saudi Arabia to bolster its defense against a massive buildup of
Iraqi troops close to the Saudi border.
   In other developments, Prince Saud, the Saudi foreign minister, was
expected to arrive in Washington for consultations with Bush and other
administration officials.
   Fitzwater said that Secretary of State James Baker was still
expected to travel Wednesday to Turkey where he will meet with Turkish
President Turgut Ozal on the gulf crisis. Ozal is reported to have shut
down the two Iraqi pipelines that pass through his country to the
Mediterranean, in accordance with the U.N. sanctions.
   A State Department official said Monday the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad
was checking on a ``sketchy report'' that 12 of 28 Americans had arrived
in the Iraqi capital. The Americans were part of several hundred
Westerners reportedly taken from hotels in Kuwait following the Iraqi
invasion. There was no word on their location and U.S. officials
restated that there was not enough information available to classify
them as hostages.
   Pentagon and administration officials reported that Iraqi troops
remained massed dangerously near the Saudi Arabia border, despite
earlier assurances from Saddam that the 100,000-strong invasion force
would be withdrawn.
   On Monday, five warships left Norfolk, Va., to join U.S. forces in
the Persian Gulf region where a total of 49 warships - some with
aircraft capabilities - are expected to position themselves within
striking distance of Iraq by next week.
   The military buildup also included ships from France, Great Britain
and the Soviet Union.

------

Cheney to meet with Mubarak
By ADAM KELLIHER
United Press International

   Defense Secretary Richard Cheney traveled to Egypt Tuesday for
talks with President Hosni Mubarak apparently aimed at mustering support
for Washington's mounting economic, political and military pressure
against Iraq.
   Cheney visited Monday with Saudi officials with a key goal of
persuading King Fahd to allow U.S. personnel on Saudi soil in light of

				    -26-

Iraq's invasion of oil-rich Kuwait. The outcome of the meeting remained
unclear.
   U.S. Embassy officials said Cheney was en route to the Egyptian
city of Alexandria for talks with Mubarak, whose government is allied
with Iraq but has denounced the invasion through the 21-nation Arab
League.
   ``We expect Secretary Cheney to arrive today for a brief stopover
to meet President Mubarak and then return to Washington,'' an embassy
spokesman said.
   The Egyptian leader was also scheduled to meet Izaat Ibrahim, the
vice chairman of Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council and Saddam's
right-hand man, who departed from Baghdad on another mission of shuttle
diplomacy.
   The potentially volatile situation in the Middle East, source of
much of the world's oil, further aggravated major financial markets
Tuesday. Tokyo's key Nikkei average plunged 1,326.67 points, or 4.6
percent, during the morning session, before recovering in the afternoon
to close down 946.46 points.
   The Nikkei's drop followed a bad day on Wall Street where the Dow
industrial suffered its seventh-biggest decline Monday in heavy trading,
plunging more than 90 points.
   The political uncertainty in the region has sent oil prices soaring
and raised fears of inflation in oil-importing nations such as the
United States and Japan.
   Saudi and U.S. military officials prepared for a possible Iraqi
attack on the oil-rich kingdom.
   Defense Secretary Dick Cheney went to Riyadh, reportedly to discuss
strategy for sending U.S. troops into Saudi Arabia should Iraqi troops
massed at the Kuwaiti-Saudi border attack. Saudi Arabia has long
resisted allowing U.S. troops on its soil.
   Saudi Arabia reportedly has fully mobilized its army and massed
troops near a neutral zone of oil fields along the country's border with
occupied Kuwait. In response, Iraq ordered drills to evacuate 4 million
citizens from Baghdad in the event of an air attack and issued rifles to
government supporters.
   The Pentagon announced in Washington further U.S. naval vessels
were assigned to strengthen forces in the vicinity of the crisis zone.
   In New York, the U.N. Security Council imposed harsh economic
sanctions aimed at pressuring Saddam to remove his forces from
neighboring Kuwait, where he invaded Thursday with up to 100,000 troops
and installed a provisional government. Sources said about 700 people
were killed in the Iraqi invasion.
   Iraq invaded its oil-rich neighbor after accusing it of
overproducing oil and driving down prices. International observers have
said Saddam seized Kuwait in hopes of infusing Iraq's troubled economy
with its riches and in an effort to appease his military supporters.
   Along with the U.N. sanctions, Turkish President Turgut Ozal told
ABC television he would halt the flow of oil through two Iraqi pipelines
that cut through Turkey to the Mediterranean, although earlier Monday
Iraq had already cut off one of the pipelines and reduced oil flow
through the other because of waning demand.

				    -27-

   Baghdad Radio, monitored in Beirut, reported that Saddam issued a
veiled warning to Bush, telling Joseph Wilson, the U.S. charge
d'affaires in Baghdad: ``Iraq is capable of protecting its rights and
interests whatever the pressures ... and the country's readiness to
sacrifice for that cause is unlimited.''
   However, the radio reported that Saddam also accepted ``legitimate
international interests in the area'' and wanted ``normal relations with
the United States on the basis of mutual respect.''
   Egypt's Middle Eastern News service said Saddam's first message to
Bush since the dispute erupted included a warning against ``any behavior
that may undermine security and stability in the area.''
   Officials in Bonn, Washington and London said Iraqi troops ordered
about 400 foreigners, including 28 Americans, out of Kuwait city hotels
and took them in buses toward Baghdad. Eleven other American oil workers
are already being detained in Iraq.
   After Saddam's hours-long meeting with the U.S. charge d'affaires
in Baghdad, State Department leaders met for about 15 minutes with Iraqi
Ambassador Mohamed al-Mashat in Washington.
   A State Department official described the meeting between al-Mashat
and Assistant Secretary of State John Kelly as ``tense'' and said Kelly
reminded the Iraqi of his country's responsibility for the safety of
Americans and other foreigners in Kuwait, where Iraq has created a
government in Kuwait to replace that of the emir, who fled to Saudi
Arabia.
   State Department spokeswoman Margaret Tutwiler said it was too
early to classify the missing Americans as hostages, but said Washington
holds Iraq ``responsible for the safety of Americans and of all foreign
nationals.''
   According to State Department figures, some 3,000 Americans had
been in Kuwait last week. Some of them apparently have left, but
Tutwiler said most are believed to still be in Kuwait.
   A British Foreign Office spokesman said 200 people stranded aboard
a British Airways jumbo jet when the invasion began were included in the
roundup.


------

Wednesday, August 8, 1990

Commentary on Today's News

`Bloody Sunday' sparked Voting Act
Commentary on Today's News:
By LEON DANIEL
UPI Chief Correspondent
   WASHINGTON (UPI) - The Voting Rights Act enacted a quarter of a
century ago changed America irrevocably and for the better.
   Most of the credit for that landmark legislation goes to the
martyred Martin Luther King Jr. and the late President Lyndon Johnson,
who signed it into law in the Rotunda of the Capitol on Aug. 6, 1965.

				    -28-

   But few of the heroes of the civil rights movement could match the
courage of John Lewis, now a Democratic congressman from Georgia.
   Lewis was arrested 40 times and often beaten brutally during the
1960s struggle for the right to vote.
   I witnessed some of his arrests and was on the scene to report for
United Press International the historic march Lewis led in Selma, Ala.,
that was to become known as ``Bloody Sunday.''
   I saw him clubbed to the ground by Alabama state troopers. He
suffered a concussion.
   The brutal attack on the 500 men, women and children on March 7,
1965, by the troopers and a mounted posse of local rednecks wielding
bullwhips and cattle prods outraged the nation and spurred Congress to
pass the Voting Rights Act.
   ``If anyone had told me then I would someday be in Congress,''
Lewis said to me last spring in Selma at a re-enactment of the historic
march, ``I would have said he was crazy.''
   Considered by many reporters who covered the civil rights movement
to be its most courageous leader, Lewis understood the importance of the
atrocity at Selma in the struggle for the right to vote.
   ``If it were not for Selma in 1965,'' Lewis told me, ``I wouldn't
be in Congress today.''
   There has been a dramatic increase in the number of black elected
officials in the quarter-century since passage of the Voting Rights Act.
   Some 7,370 blacks now hold elective office, compared to fewer than
500 in 1965.
   The state with the most, 705, is Alabama, where Lewis was born.
   When Lewis led that ``Bloody Sunday'' march, only 2.1 percent of
Selma's voting-age blacks were registered to vote, compared to 70
percent today.
   The Voting Rights Act still is needed to protect the rights of
minority voters. It still is the key for opening the political process
to all Americans.
   Frank Parker, author of ``Black Votes Count: Political Empowerment
in Mississippi after 1965,'' contends that racial gerrymandering and
at-large elections are used to weaken minority voting power.
   Parker breaks down gerrymandering into three forms: cracking,
stacking and packing.
   Cracking is fragmenting minority communities into many districts.
   Stacking is diluting minority voting strength by combining minority
population concentration with a larger white population concentration.
   Packing is denying minorities influence in adjoining districts by
overconcentrating them in a single district.
   Now minorities can deal with such shady shenanigans in the courts,
thanks to the heroic struggle of men and women like Lewis.

---------
Ditch the Goodwill Games
By JIM SLATER
UPI Sports Writer
   SEATTLE (UPI) - More Goodwill. Less Games.
   What a waste of time and money the Goodwill Games were. They serve

				    -29-

no purpose now, if they ever did. In any case, they should never be held
again.
   People of the world are too wise for this Olympics wanna-be. They
aren't paying attention. As a result, Ted Turner takes a $40 million
bath on this turkey. Turner couldn't sell this fiasco, even by
colorizing a city known for overcast.
   The Goodwill Games symbolize what the United States has become.
Public relations. Image. Style over substance. Events no longer exist on
merit. They exist because they can, not because they should.
   This event had the mechanics of a biggie but none of the soul. It
was a made-for-television monster starring Larry King as the ``see only
good'' talking video head. He told us how great things were on a daily
basis. Those of us here knew better. Fortunately for King's career, no
one was watching anyway.
   The Games lasted far too long for the competition schedule. Most
athletes used the event as a tuneup for a world championship.
Competitions were scheduled to avoid conflicts with those world
championships. Athletes and television people who ran the Games knew it
was only an athletic appetizer.
   Some winners emerged. People made friends with others around the
world. Many saw Seattle for the first time and enjoyed it. The Games did
not interfere with Sunday's hydroplane race, the area's major annual
event. Those benefits weren't worth the cost, even if I'm not paying.
   For 17 days - longer than the Seoul Olympics - happy Goodwill Games
rhetoric came at us like a smiling, bouncing gymnast.
   It may not make for the most compelling drama, but then again it's
a whole lot better than terrorists at the Munich Olympics or Africans
marching out in Montreal.
   Does the world need a Goodwill Games come 1994? The Barcelona
Olympics will be 2 years old by then. World championships of all sorts
will have come and gone. Athletes the world over will have had ample
opportunity to test themselves.
   In any case, the political climate is far different now from when
this television creation first began in 1986. The world has shown that
ideas can travel from the West to Eastern Europe and back again. In many
quarters, there is new hope for peace.
   The Goodwill Games was a Ted Turner production from start to
finish. The undertaking could cost him $40 million. The next Goodwill
Games are scheduled for Moscow and Leningrad in 1994. Whether Turner
wants to risk another $40 million to bring the world women's judo,
rhythmic gymnastics and synchronized swimming remains to be seen.
   Then again, maybe the more important question is whether Jane Fonda
will be on Turner's arm four years down the road.
   Still, it's Ted Turner's money, and he's got plenty of it. But
money for the Goodwill Games could be better spent elsewhere. Just
because Turner can throw this thing together is no reason to do so.
Wealth does not make worthiness.
   Let's put the Goodwill Games to bed. We don't need them. In color
or black and white.

---------

				    -30-

Kuwait: poor little unloved rich kid
By JIM ANDERSON
   WASHINGTON (UPI) - One of the discoveries made by American
policy-makers in the crisis created by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait is that
the Arab world has been surprisingly divided in its willingness to stand
up for a country that has been mugged by its stronger neighbor.
   One reason, according to a long-time administration Middle East
analyst who declines to be further identified is that Kuwait has been
the George Steinbrenner of Middle East politics: greedy, autocratic,
unpredictable and insensitive to criticism from the outside world.
   In the Middle East, most rivalries can be traced to oil or money,
and Kuwait has plenty of both.
   Not content with an oil quota set by the Organization of Petroelum
Exporting Countries that made it one of the richest countries in the
world, Kuwait has been cheating for the last several years on the amount
of oil it takes out of the ground.
   The OPEC quota for 1989 had been 1.1 million barrels a day. But, by
running the pumps overtime, Kuwait increased that output to about 1.8
million barrels a day. This not only had the effect of increasing
Kuwait's own national income, far beyond its own ability to spend, but
it also created an oil glut that lowered the world price of oil, in
effect robbing other oil producers, such as Iraq, of some of the income
they needed.
   For a period, such unrestrained greed was tolerated by the rest of
the Arab world because Kuwait had been relatively generous about giving
some of it away in the form of aid to countries such as Jordan, Syria
and Iraq.
   But that foreign aid level has dropped sharply, from $1 billion a
year in 1981 to $140 million in 1988.
   Another form of pumping some of that Kuwaiti money into the Arab
world was in the form of remittances - wages paid to migrant laborers
from other countries, who would send most of their wages back home.
   Kuwait, ruled by the al-Sabah family, established sort of a caste
system, based on nationalities. The Egyptians were at the bottom of the
occupational scale - street sweepers and garbage collectors. A bit
further up were the Syrians and Jordanians, who supplied the skilled
labor.
   The Palestinians, many of them educated at American universities in
Cairo and Beirut, were the middle managers and were the backbone of the
broadcasting and newspaper industry.
   The Pakistanis were the shopkeepers and the money-changers, and a
few Westerners were installed as managers of banks and insurance
companies.
   At the top of this food chain were the small group of Kuwaiti
families, who collected the money, which came directly or indirectly
from oil. One key was a Kuwaiti law which required that at least 50
percent of every business must be owned by a Kuwaiti.
   The impact was a form of legal extortion on foreign investment.
Every outsider - whether General Motors or McDonald's - had to give 50
percent of its investment and profit to a Kuwaiti business partner, who
often did nothing except sign his name on various documents a couple of

				    -31-

times a week.
   Even that system was tolerable as long as the money kept flowing,
but when the price of oil dropped - partly because of Kuwaiti
over-production - the migrant laborers were precipitously expelled.
   Foreign investors resented seeing 50 percent of their dwindling
profits go to inactive Kuwaiti ``partners.''
   For the past 10 years, Kuwait has been able to keep peace on its
border with Iraq by paying blackmail, in the form of loans, to Iraq to
keep its war with Iran going, and by permitting vast shipments of arms
destined for Iraq to come in Kuwaiti ports. In Kuwait, the arms were
shipped north to Iraq in long, nocturnal convoys of trucks.
   In order to keep peace with the Iranians, the Kuwaitis played a
double game, closing a blind eye to hundreds of small boats which
slipped across the Gulf every night, smuggling arms to Iran, thus
breaking the embargo set by Western nations.
   When Iraq demanded last week ``forgiveness'' of $2.4 billion in
past ``loans,'' the Emir of Kuwait said he wanted to bargain. Two hours
later, the Iraqis walked out of the bargaining session, with the pretext
they needed for the invasion, describing Kuwait's sharp practices as
``aggression.''
   Within 48 hours, Iraqi tanks were rolling south across the Kuwaiti
sands.

---------

Wednesday, August 8, 1990

Special Feature

Judge frees man in apparent misidentification
   SALEM, Va. (UPI) - A judge freed Alexandria roofer Kenneth Edward
Bailey on bail from the Roanoke County Jail on Monday, a few weeks after
he was charged with attempted rape and attempted murder in what now
appears to be a case of mistaken identity.
   Though two sexual-assault victims positively identified Bailey and
he failed a polygraph test that he had hoped would prove his innocence,
Roanoke County substitute General District Court Judge John Apgar let
him out on $1,000 bail.
   Apgar took the action, reducing bail from $900,000, after hearing
evidence the real culprit might be Timothy Joseph Burnopp, a Franklin
County rape suspect who authorities said confessed to one attack with
which Bailey is charged.
   Bailey's defense attorney, Vince Lilley, said Burnopp looks so much
like Bailey he could be his twin. Burnopp also was using the name of his
dead uncle - Kenneth Bailey.
   Kenneth Edward Bailey is not in the clear yet, but Lilley said he
hopes the matter will be settled at an Aug. 22 preliminary hearing or
perhaps before then.
   Roanoke County Assistant Commonwealth's Attorney Mark Claytor said
he was not ready to drop charges of attempted murder, attempted rape and
abduction with intent to defile yet because of the eyewitness

				    -32-

identifications and because he had not talked to Burnopp.
   The case is ``everybody's worst nightmare,'' Lilley said. ``It's
one of those horrifying things. It's TV movie material.''
   Police seemed to have a solid case against Bailey until Burnopp was
arrested Friday night in the Thursday rape of a Franklin County woman.
   The case started in early July, when a woman riding her bicycle on
the Blue Ridge Parkway reported a man attempted to assault her. She
described the assailant and his car, and gave police a license-plate
number.
   On July 9, the same man in the same car stopped a woman driving the
parkway by flashing his lights behind her. He pulled her out of her car,
attempted to rape her and then strangled her until she lost
consciousness. The woman survived the attack.
   When police ran a check on the tag, they found it registered under
a fictitious Callaway address to a Kenneth Bailey with the same
birthdate as Kenneth Edward Bailey of Alexandria.
   So when Kenneth Edward Bailey came up on the state computer as
being on probation for a misdemeanor, Roanoke County police asked
Alexandria authorities for photo. The two Blue Ridge Parkway victims
positively identified Bailey as their assailant through a photo lineup.
   Bailey protested he had never even been to the Roanoke Valley when
he was arrested in Alexandria by Roanoke County police officers. But
when police then found outstanding Roanoke County traffic warrants for a
Kenneth A. Bailey, the officer who had issued those tickets picked
Kenneth Edward Bailey out of a crowd of prisoners.
   Then, last week, Bailey failed a lie-detector test, which he
attributed to nerves.
   Last Thursday, while Bailey still was in jail, a Franklin County
woman was raped when she stopped after a car, which matched the
description of the car in the earlier attacks, flashed its lights from
behind. The driver, who also matched the description of the assailant in
the other attacks, pulled her out of the car, raped her and then choked
her into unconsciousness, Lilley said.
   Franklin County authorities arrested Burnopp and charged him with
rape and sodomy in the Thursday attack after spotting his car Friday
night.
   Judge Apgar apparently had no problem lowering Bailey's bail after
hearing the story in court Monday.
   ``This case may very well be one that's dismissed by the
commonwealth before preliminary hearing,'' Apgar said in setting the new
bail.

------

Unionized commercial workers set plans against multinationals
By CARLOS BREZINA
UPI Business Writer

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - With internationalization of retailing on the
increase, unions representing commercial workers in 20 countries met
Monday and vowed to join forces in fighting unfair labor practices they

				    -33-

said multinational companies engage in.
   Their conference, sponsored by the United Food and Commercial
Workers International Union and the Geneva-based Federation of
Commercial, Clerical, Professional and Technical Employee Unions, is the
first to plan coordinated strategies for dealing with international
companies.
   ``Just as our employers hopscotch national borders and oceans, so
too must labor's strategies,'' said UFCW International President William
H. Wynn in hisopening adress.
   Wynn said workers worldwide are threatened by multinationals trying
to apply ``lowest-common-denominator labor protections.''
   Using as an example of this a free-trade treaty signed by the
United States and Canada, Wynn said that ``the U.S. government eyes
Canada's superior package of social insurance and sees a threat to free
trade.''
   But intead of raising U.S. standards, the Bush administration ``is
demanding that Canada reduce its benefits to our inferior levels,'' Wynn
continued.
   The internationalization of retailing promises greater choice and
perhaps lower prices for many of the world's consumers, said Philip
Jennings, acting general secretary of FIET. ``But this must come from
economies of scale and increased efficiency, not lowering workers'
standards.''
   Jennings exhorted the unions to develop a ``database giving precise
information on companies, their union strength and where we have
collective bargaining rights, and more systematic reporting on retailers
which abuse union rights.''
   He also asked for a global campaign to obtain more rights for
workers in takeovers and for ``corporate campaigns which involve close
coordination and involvement of our affiliates.''
   Working groups will sit down Tuesday to develop strategies for
organizating workers and combatting union-busting, aimed at specific
multinational companies. The Tuesday meetings will take place behind
closed doors.
   According to UFCW spokesman Bruce Kozarsky, the targets include
Food Lion Inc., a supermarket chain in the southeastern United States
owned by the Belgian company Delhaize; the Furrs supermarket chain,
based in Albuquerque, N.M., and owned by the German company Leibbrand;
and the Swedish retailer Ikea, which is expanding in the United States
and Europe.
   Attending the conference were union leaders from Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Denmark, France, West
Germany, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Poland,
Singapore, South Africa, Sweden, the United States and Zimbabwe.


------

Refunding opens, yields fall on 3-year notes
By VINCENT DEL GIUDICE
UPI Business Writer

				    -34-


   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Yields fell on 3-year Treasury notes Tuesday to
an average of 8.10 percent, the lowest level since November, at the
start of the government's three-day quarterly refunding.
   The Treasury Department auctioned $11.53 billion of the 8 percent
interest rate notes at an average of $99.738 with 100 equaling the face
value and one point representing $10 on each $1,000 investment.
   At the last quarterly refunding, May 8, the average yield on 3-year
Treasury notes was 8.74 percent. Tuesday's 8.10 yield was the lowest
yield on a 3-year offering since 7.77 percent Nov. 9, 1989, the Treasury
Department said.
   Cash raised through the quarterly refunding allows the government
to settle its debts, including other securities reaching maturity.
   Against a backdrop of a new Mideast crisis and a weakening domestic
economy, the government accepted about one out of every three bids for
the notes, which are backed by the full faith and credit of the United
States.
   In times of doubt, many investors prefer short-term securities,
such as the three-year notes.
   The quarterly refunding will continue Wednesday with an auction of
10-year notes totaling $10.5 billion.
   On Thursday, the Treasury Department will auction 30-year bonds
totaling $10.25 billion as well as 36-day cash management bills Thursday
totaling $10 billion.
   All the issues offered through the refunding will settle Aug. 15.
   There was doubt last week as to whether the refunding would go on
as planned because Congress had yet to increase the debt limit. But
lawakers passed a short-term bill granting $72 billion in additional
borrowing authority through Oct. 2 to keep the government running.
   Robert Glauber, the under secretary of the Treasury for finance,
had said the quarterly refunding would be delayed if the House and
Senate failed to pass the legislation increasing the debt limit.

------

Consumer credit up only $463 million in June
By VINCENT DEL GIUDICE
UPI Business Writer

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - Consumer borrowing slowed in June, increasing
only $463 million at an annual growth rate of 0.8 percent on fewer auto
loans and credit card charges, the Federal Reserve Board said Tuesday.
   Private economists expected an increase of $2.5 billion in credit.
   In May, consumer credit surged $3.65 billion, at an annual growth
rate of 6.1 percent, after an increase of $390 million in April, at an
annual growth rate of 0.6 percent.
   ``Outstanding auto loans declined while growth in revolving credit
slowed'' in June, the Federal Reserve said in its monthly report.
``Other credit outstanding rose and mobile home loans fell.''
   Specifically, automobile loans fell $1.6 billion in June after
dipping $5 million in May, while mobile home loans dropped $85 million

				    -35-

in June after gaining $113 million in May.
   Revolving credit increased $1.3 billion in June after gaining
nearly $3.2 billion in May and fueling most of that month's gain.
   Consumers made fewer charges in Junes on credit cards issued by
banks, but increased the usage of cards issued by retail stores and
gasoline companies, the report said.
   In the category of other credit, charges increased $827 million in
June after rising $353 million in May.
   The Federal Reserve also said that auto finance companies charged
12.58 percent interest on new car loans in June, up from 12.23 percent
in May. The finance companies also charged 16 percent interest on used
cars in June, down from 16.03 percent in May.
   No data was available for terms of credit offered by banks in June,
but in May the report said banks charged 11.82 percent interest on
48-month new car loans, 15.41 percent on 24-month personal loans, and
14.09 percent interest on mobile home loans.
   Bank credit cards in May averaged 18.14 percent, the Federal
Reserve said.

------

Market Report

   Dow Jones closing stock averages.
30 Indus  2710.64 off  5.70
20 Trans   964.78 off 15.51
15 Utils   204.41 off  0.51
65 Stocks  946.07 off  5.63

   AMEX Most Active Stocks Close.
KingdomDenmarkWts	  12 7-8 off   1-2
SalomonIncNikkeiPutWts	  12	 off   5-8
Amdahl			  12 1-2 up    7-8
A/S EksportfinansPutWts'93 4 1-2 off   1-4
PaineWeberPutWts'93        4 1-2 off   3-8

   New York Stock Exchange Indexes- close.
Composite	183.45 up  0.13
Industrial	228.87 unchanged
Transport	150.51 off 0.82
Utility 	 86.99 up  0.14
Finance 	130.29 up  0.65
   Equivalent to a gain of 3 cents in the average price of a N.Y.S.E.
common share.
   Volume 231,580,000 shares.

   NYSE Most Active Stocks
Texaco		     64 3-4 off   1-4
AlcanAluminum	     22 1-2 unch
GE		     67     up	1
PhillipMorrisHold'g  45     up  1

				    -36-

Walmart 	     28 5-8 unch
BoeingCo	     51 1-2 up	1
GM		     40 1-8 off 1 3-8
ATT		     35 3-8 up	1
IBM		    103     off   7-8
Exxon		     53 3-8 off 1 1-8

NYSE advances	     736
declines	     837
unchanged	     445

AMEX volume   19,316,000
advances	     257
declines	     341
unchanged	     247

NYSE Comp  183.45 up   0.13
NYSE Inds  228.87 unch
AM Index   339.84 off  0.43

   Standard and Poor's hourly stock indexes (1982 average equals 100
for transportation, all others 1941-43 equals 10):
400 Ind   20 Trns  40 Util   40 Fncl 500 Stocks
Previous     394.74    245.98	134.82	   25.15    334.43
Opening      397.55    248.21	135.63	   25.50    336.95
11 a.m.      397.07    247.70	134.98	   25.46    336.38
Noon	     394.78    245.66	134.69	   25.37    334.63
1 p.m.	     393.97    244.36	134.56	   25.34    333.99
2 p.m.	     394.17    244.41	134.35	   25.35    334.07
3 p.m.	     394.00    245.34	134.26	   25.34    333.95
Close	     395.10    245.61	134.47	   25.43    334.83
Change	    up 0.36   up 0.37 off 0.35	 up 0.28   up 0.40

---------
   The prime lending rate stood at 10 percent.
   The discount rate was seven percent.

Certificates of Deposit: (Average of all major U-S banks)
   30 to 59 days brought 7.93 percent.
   60 to 89 days brought 7.90 percent.
   90 to 119 days brought 7.89 percent.
   120 to 149 days brought 7.88 percent.
   150 to 179 days brought 7.88 percent.
   180 days brought 7.88 percent.

   U-S Treasury Bills: Secondary market discount rate:
   Three months brought 7.38-7.36 percent.
   Six months brought 7.33-7.31 percent.
   One year brought 7.24-7.22 percent.

Telerate Interest Rate Index Tuesday: 7.762 up 0.025.

				    -37-


---------
   NEW YORK (UPI) - Dow Jones closing averages:
Stock  Open    High    Low     Close   Net Chg.
30 Indus 2744.06 2763.86 2676.24 2710.64 off  5.70
20 Trans  989.60  999.45  954.56  964.78 off 15.51
15 Utils  205.23  206.99  202.28  204.41 off  0.51
65 Stock  959.85  967.72  934.95  946.07 off  5.63
   Transactions in stocks used in averages:
     Tuesday	  Monday
Indus	 42,831,000   35,238,800
Trans	  4,984,800    5,660,800
Utils	  4,437,400    3,158,300
65 Stock 52,253,200   44,057,900
---
Bonds	      Close  Net Chg.
20 Bonds	 91.25 off 0.05
10 Public Utils  92.31	up 0.06
10 Industrials	 90.19 off 0.17
---
   Dow Jones commodity futures index (Dec. 31, 1974 average equals
100) closed at 132.54 up 0.08.


------

MARKETS AT A GLANCE
By United Press International

   NYSE Stocks - Lower in active trading.
   Bonds - Mostly lower.
   American Stocks - Lower in active trading.
   London Stocks - Closed higher in moderate trading.
   Tokyo Stocks - Closed sharply lower in light trading.
   Dollar - Slightly lower against key foreign currencies.
   Gold Futures - Lower.
   Cotton - Slightly higher.
   Chicago Grain Futures - Corn closed off  1/4 to up 3, soybeans up 1 to
   down 2  1/2, wheat off 1 to up  1/2 and oats up  1/2 to  3/4.
   Cattle Trade - Steady; top $76.00.


------

COMMODITY FUTURES AT A GLANCE
By United Press International

   Cocoa - $2 to $4 a ton higher for a 10 metric ton contract.
   Coffee - 0.05 cent to 1.05 cent a pound higher for a 37,500-pound
contract.
   Copper - 0.10 to 0.95 cent a pound higher for a 25,000-pound

				    -38-

contract.
   Cotton - 0.38 cent higher to 0.35 cent a pound lower for a
50,000-pound contract.
   Gold - On the Comex $0.10 higher to $0.70 an ounce lower for a
100-troy-ounce contract.
   Platinum - $8.10 to $8.30 an ounce lower for a 50-troy-ounce
contract.
   Orange Juice - 0.25 cent higher to 0.30 cent a pound lower for a
15,000-pound contract.
   Silver - On the Comex 3.2 to 3.5 cents an ounce lower for a
5,000-troy-ounce contract.
   World Sugar - 0.008 to 0.013 cent a pound higher for a
112,000-pound contract.


------

Wednesday, August 8, 1990

People in the News

   JACKSON COLLAPSES: An ailing Janet Jackson had to walk off the
stage Sunday night in St. Louis after only three songs. Even at the
outset Jackson didn't look well, holding her head, clutching her stomach
and appearing out of breath during the 15 minutes she was onstage. She
managed to get backstage before collapsing and then was taken to the
Barnes Hospital emergency room for tests. The hospital wouldn't comment
on her illness but a Jackson spokeswoman said the singer had been on the
road for several months and was exhausted. The 13,000 people in the
audience will get refunds for the $22 tickets and promoters hope to
reschedule Jackson at some point. There was no immediate word on what
would become of the rest of the dates on her Rhythm Nation tour, which
is scheduled to run through Sept. 4.

   ARNOLD VS. PAPARAZZI: Roseanne Barr`s husband, Tom Arnold, is
shaping up as the Sean Penn of the `90s when it comes to paparazzi.
Arnold is accused of pushing and punching his way past three
photographers who had gathered to await their arrival at Los Angeles
International Airport. After the fracas, the photographers marched down
to the police station and filed a complaint and the city attorney's
office now will decide if there is enough evidence to file misdemeanor
charges against Arnold. A police spokesman said the photographers were
believed to be free-lancers and there was no word on whether they were
injured.

   DID POE SAY NO?: A researcher says Edgar Allan Poe`s reputation as
a drug fiend is undeserved. Christopher Eckard, a ranger and researcher
at the Edgar Allan Poe National Historic Site in Philadelphia, has gone
through the writer's letters and other documents and has found no
mention of the opium and morphine habits usually attributed to Poe.
``The bottom line is that there is no hard evidence to back up any of

				    -39-

Poe's reputation,'' said Eckard, author of the study ``Did Poe Just Say
No?'' Daniel Hoffman, an English professor at the University of
Pennsylvania, questions Eckard's conclusion. ``The absence of such
mention (in Poe's letters) is not in itself conclusive,'' he said.
``Although one should resist the temptation to identify Poe with the
abusers in his stories, he was interested in altered states of
consciousness,'' Hoffman said. ``He knew enough about drug-induced
trances to know its effect on people.''

   GLIMPSES: Aerosmith has been booked to appear Sept. 8 at the Hard
Rock Cafe opening in Las Vegas and proceeds from the night will go to
the St. Jude's Good Shepherd Campus, a home for abused children. The
appearance comes two days after Aerosmith is to perform at the MTV
Awards in Los Angeles and just before they resume their world tour by
heading to the Far East and Australia ... The late Lucille Ball`s 79th
birthday won't go unmarked at Ellen's Stardust Diner in New York
Tuesday. A Lucy look-alike contest was scheduled with many of the women
who answered to a casting call for a CBS movie about Ball scheduled to
compete and Henny Youngman among the judges.

---------

Cable TV company investigation requested
By THOMAS S. DRAKE

   MADISON, Wis. (UPI) - The national cable televison company, TCI
Cablevision, was accused Monday of violating state consumer protection
laws for providing a free television listing and then asking customers
to pay for the service.
   State Rep. Spencer Black, D-Madison, said TCI, which serves several
markets in the Madison area and has operations in all 50 states,
provided customers with a monthly magazine called ``TV Entertainment''
for free.
   He said customers ``unfairly'' received notice from the company
saying they now would be billed $6 per year for the magazine unless they
wrote back cancelling their previously free subscription. Some of the
notices, Black said, were delivered July 28, eight days after the
deadline for consumers to notify the comany of their intentions.
   ``In order to avoid being charged, they were obliged to respond to
TCI. This appears to amount to false and misleading advertising,'' Black
said.
   Consumers apparently never were told that agreeing to receive the
free magazine could lead to to them being billed for it at a later date,
he said.
   The state Justice Department said it was reviewing Black's request
for an investigation, but provided no additional comment.
   TCI in Madison and in Overland Park, Kans., where it's marketing
divison is headquartered, did not return calls from United Press
International.
   Black recently criticized 1984 deregulation of the cable television
industry. He recently organized a group of 24 state legislators to write

				    -40-

Congress asking the industry again be regulated.


------

Alabama professor named to shuttle crew

   (BIRMINGHAM, Alabama) - A University of Alabama-Birmingham
professor could be one of the members of a 1992 space shuttle crew.
   NASA yesterday announced that U-A-B optometry professor Larry
DeLucas was one of four scientists selected to serve as payload
specialists for a Spacelab mission in March of 1992. After completing
nine months of training, two of the researchers will be selected to fly
on the mission and the other two will serve as backups.
   DeLucas, who is associate director of U-A-B's Center for
Macromolecular Crystallography, says he has wanted to be an astronaut
since he was in high school. The 40-year-old scientists has been sending
up protein crystal growth experiments on shuttle missions since 1985...
but he says flying on the shuttle would allow him to perform more
experiments and make changes during the flight.
   DeLucas and other researchers have been conducting experiments on
growing crystals in the weightlessness of space with hopes of designing
new drugs to fight AIDS and other diseases.


------

Automatic dialers to be investigated

   (RALEIGH, North Carolina) - The State Attorney General's office is
investigating those pesky automatic dialers used by telemarketers. The
devices randomly dial telephone numbers and sometimes give listeners an
UNwanted recorded commerical message.
   The computer generated calls, however, are NOT just a pain in the
ear. State officials say some messages urge people to call 900 numbers
without making it clear it is NOT a free call. Some 900 number calls
cost up to 50-dollars.
   Special Deputy Attorney General Jo Ann Sanford says in some cases
the calls are just a scam.
   Use of the computer calling machines is against the law in North
Carolina. But some calls come from across state lines. A federal
proposal will soon stop that practice.

------

Tandy unveils 6-pound computer

   DALLAS (UPI) - A notebook-sized computer that weighs just 6 pounds
was  introduced Monday by Tandy Corp., which plans to begin sales of the
new computer in its nationwide chain of Radio Shack stores next month.
   The 1500 HD is Tandy's smallest computer developed to date and will

				    -41-

have a retail price of $1,999.
   Tandy's major competitors in the small computer market are Toshiba
and Houston-based Compaq Computer Corp., said JoeAnn Stahel, president
of the Dallas-based StoreBoard market research firm.
   ``The new machine is on a par with what Compaq and Toshiba are
offering,'' Stahel said. ``It has a good feel, and it gives you a lot of
functionality in a small package.''
   ``The issue facing Tandy is the same one facing everybody,'' Stahel
said. ``They have to work on convincing people that they need a
lightweight laptop computer.''
   Tandy spokeswoman Fran McGehee said the company plans to market the
computer to both home and business users.

------

NASA subcontractor pleads guilty to fraud charges

   HOUSTON (UPI) - The Department of Justice said Monday a NASA
subcontractor has has pled guilty to one criminal count of submitting a
false statement to the United States government.
   ILC Dover Inc. has agreed to pay the Department of Justice nearly
$1.2 million to settle civil fraud allegations that the firm defrauded
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration by mischarging labor
hours to NASA contracts and overcharging costs on other NASA
subcontracts.
   ILC has also agreed to pay a $10,000 fine, officials said.
   An investigation revealed that top management officials at ILC's
Space Systems Division in Houston personally directed ILC employees to
falsify their labor timesheets.
   ILC employees also were instructed to mischarge work to NASA
cost-reimbursable contracts when the employees had been working on ILC's
commercial contracts or on other NASA cost-reimbursible contracts.
   ILC also submitted fraudulent labor cost data to NASA and received
inflated cost reimbursements.
   The criminal plea and civil fraud settlement resulted from a joint
investigation conducted by NASA and the FBI.

------

NASA managers rule out shuttle test
By WILLIAM HARWOOD
UPI Science Writer

   CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. (UPI) - NASA managers have canceled a planned
fueling test for the shuttle Columbia, allowing the repaired spaceship's
launch to move up four or five days to around the first of September,
officials said Tuesday.
   Sources who requested anonymity said several top agency officials
argued against the decision, but apparently were overruled. William
Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for spaceflight, planned to
discuss the agency's launch plans at an afternoon news conference in

				    -42-

Washington.
   In the meantime, engineers at the Kennedy Space Center are gearing
up to haul Columbia to launch pad 39A early Friday for final
preparations before liftoff around the first of the month on a
long-delayed astronomy mission.
   Equipped with a new fuel line fitting to replace one that leaked
explosive hydrogen in May, Columbia had been scheduled for a fueling
test Aug. 23 to make sure the leak has been eliminated once and for all.
   But officials said Tuesday NASA managers had decided to eliminate
the test to save time. Instead, sensors will be used to search for any
leaking hydrogen as the shuttle is fueled for launch.
   ``We're actually going to do a tanking test,'' said one agency
official who asked not to be identified. ``It just happens to be the day
(before) launch. We're still going to have sensors there and if they
pick up anything and we go out of specification, we'll stop.''
   Engineers said the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
had little to gain from another fueling test because regardless of when
another leak might be detected - during a fueling test or the night
before launch - Columbia would have to be hauled back to its hangar for
repairs.
   And that would prevent any chance of launching the ship before the
shuttle Discovery's high-priority flight Oct. 5 to carry the
European-built Ulysses solar probe into orbit.
   Given that Columbia is equipped with a new fuel line fitting and
that engineers have no reason to suspect additional problems, many NASA
managers believe the agency has nothing to gain by conducting another
fueling test.
   A launch around Sept. 1 would be scheduled for around 1:17 a.m.
   At the controls will be commander Vance Brand, 59, and co-pilot Guy
Gardner, 42. Their crewmates are John ``Mike'' Lounge, 43, Robert
Parker, 53, Jeffrey Hoffman, 45, and civilian astronomers Ronald Parise,
39, and Samuel Durrance, 46.
   The goal of the 10-day mission is to study the high-energy
ultraviolet light emitted by stars, galaxies and other deep space
objects, radiation that cannot penetrate Earth's atmosphere.
   The astronauts originally were set for launch May 30, but during
fuel loading the night before, hydrogen gas was detected spewing into
Columbia's engine compartment.
   Subsequent tests traced the potentially dangerous leak to seals
inside the ship's 17-inch-wide hydrogen ``disconnect'' fitting where
fuel lines from the external tank enter the belly of the orbiter. The
disconnect assembly allows the external tank to be jettisoned in space.
   Columbia's disconnect fitting was replaced by one built for the new
shuttle, Endeavour, presumably fixing the problem.
   While that work was going on, NASA proceeded with plans to launch
Atlantis on a four-day military mission, but the mid-July flight was put
on hold when a leak showed up in a joint where the ship's 17-inch-wide
hydrogen line bolts to its disconnect assembly.
   The problem, unrelated to the leak that grounded Columbia, could
not be fixed at the launch pad, and Atlantis will be hauled back to the
Vehicle Assembly Building Thursday to make room for Columbia on pad 39A.

				    -43-

   Discovery is scheduled to follow Columbia into space, with liftoff
from pad 39B planned for Oct. 5. If all goes well, Atlantis will finally
get off on its secret military mission in early November.ASA's launch
schedule is built around the Discovery mission. In order to fly over the
poles of the sun, Ulysses must first be fired to Jupiter so it can use
the giant planet's gravity for a slingshot boost down and out of the
plane of the solar system, back toward the sun.
   Because of the positions of Earth and Jupiter, Ulysses must be
launched during October or the flight will be delayed 13 months to allow
the planets to return to a good launch position.

------

Report places collider cost at $9.7 billion

   WASHINGTON (UPI) - The latest study on the superconducting super
collider reportedly indicates the giant atom smasher may cost as much as
$9.7 billion to build, the highest figure yet announced.
   A report published by the Washington newsletter Inside Energy said
a U.S. Department of Energy auditing team has placed the collider's cost
at least $1 billion higher than three other estimates made recently by
DOE experts and scientists.
   Energy Secretary James Watkins is expected to present a final cost
estimate to Congress next week.
   DOE spokesman Jeff Sherwood told the Dallas Times Herald that
Energy Undersecretary Henson Moore has indicated the latest study
generally agrees with the other three on the basic cost of building the
collider, but differs on how much money is needed to cover
contingencies.
   Such contingencies could include delays caused by breaks in
congressional funding or technological problems in developing key parts
of the collider, which is set to be built around Waxahachie, Texas,
south of Dallas.
   Sherwood said he could not comment further on the unfinished study
being done by the department's Independent Cost Estimating group, which
includes DOE experts and outside contractors not connected with the
collider project.
   Another group not directly involved with the SSC, the High Energy
Physics Advisory Panel, placed the collider's cost at $8.6 billion.
   The SSC Laboratory in DeSoto and DOE's Office of Energy Research,
both responsible for collider construction and research, adopted
estimates of $7.8 billion and $8.3 billion, respectively.
   Moore said last week that the department is inclined to accept the
SSC Lab figure.
   ``The credibility of the Energy Department is at stake in this
entire cost process,'' Rep. Dennis Eckart, D-Ohio, told the
Times-Herald. ``Given the vagary of the numbers and the unfortunate
upward trend line, they're going to have some explaining to do to the
appropriations committee.''
   Randy Erben, head of the State of Texas' office in Washington,
D.C., said the ICE report apparently will not be ``helpful

				    -44-

politically,'' but noted that the four estimates seem to differ only on
the contingency costs.


------

Wednesday, August 8, 1990

The Rest Of the News.....

Cow goes on rampage
   GAINESVILLE, Fla. (UPI) - A runaway cow was back behind a fence
after escaping from a livestock yard, ramming cars, chasing would-be
cowboys and generally raising a ruckus during what turned out to be a
roadside rodeo.
   The black, 1,000-pound cow escaped from the Gainesville Livestock
Mariet late Saturday afternoon and took off down a heavily traveled
road. Oddly enough, the first people to confront it were a former Texas
cowboy and a man who had gone to the store to buy some steaks.
   About a half-dozen people tried to move in on the mobile moo-cow,
but it kept butting into cars and swerving out of the way as passers-by
pointed and hollered at the sight.
   Three cars were damaged before the cow loped into some nearby woods
and was cornered.
   Police Officer Dan Mesa and a couple of bystanders tried to coral
the beast until help could arrive. But the cow charged anyone who
approached.
   Mesa was nearly hit three times. And Larry Edwards, whose car was
rammed twice by the cow, said he would have bought the farm himself
except that the cow's charge was blocked by a tree.
   ``If it weren't for that tree, he would have got me for sure,''
Edwards said before being told the cow was a she.
   A posse of cowboys from the livestock market arrived with a
tranquilizer gun after about two hours. They hit the battling bovine
with the first shot, but that sent her running across some yards and
right by a McDonald's before it finally collapsed.
   ``He's down,'' a winded man, also apparently confused as to the
cow's gender, was heard saying over the police-band radio two hours and
40 minutes after bossy's escape. ``The bull is down.''
   Of course, that presented another problem: how to load a half-ton
package of doped-up beef into a trailer. But then that's why they make
electric cattle pods.
   With cowboys prodding and pulling at the cow with ropes, the animal
struggled to its feet, collapsing several times before lurching into a
trailer and collapsing one last time.
   Scott Coleman, one of the would-be cowpokes, was left with two
3-inch-deep dents in the door and fender of his pickup truck, testiments
to the cow's audacity.
   ``They've got hard heads,'' Coleman said. ``And they don't make
cars like they used to.''


				    -45-

---------
Man wants political party in his own name
   SPRINGFIELD, Ill. (UPI) - Wham! Bang! Jim Wham is in the race.
   The Republican attorney from Centralia wants to run for Congress
and he took the first step Monday by filing petitions with the Illinois
State Board of Elections to form his own party, with the name of the Jim
Wham Party.
   Wham, 71, turned in petitions containing what he said were more
than 12,000 signatures in an effort to run for the U.S. House against
Democratic Rep. Glenn Poshard of Carterville. Poshard had been running
unopposed.
   Wham's platform is based on his disapproval of Poshard's vote
against a proposed constitutional amendment to ban flag burning. Wham
said Poshard's vote on the issue took place after the deadline to run as
an established candidate so he had to form his own party, his only
vehicle to get on the ballot.
   ``He's not going to get a free ride with a vote like that,'' Wham
said.
   Wham, who has been a delegate to four Republican national
conventions, needs at least 11,385 valid signatures to get his name and
party on the ballot. Opponents have until the end of the week to file
objections and try to get some of Wham's signatures disqualified.

---------
   (ASHEVILLE, North Carolina) - First it was a Jesse Helms' watch
that kept time by running backwards. Now its Jesse Helms toilet paper.
   Now consumers can buy a roll of toilet paper featuring politcal
cartoons lambasting the Republican Senator from North Carolina.
   The latest Helms item is the brainchild of James Warlick of
Asheville... a businessman who sells campaign buttons and other
political paraphernalia.
   Warlick says the idea for Helms toilet paper hit him about the time
the controversy began over government funding of allegedly obscene art.
   Warlick says... quote... ``Why NOT a piece of real obscene art?''
   The toilet paper went on sale last week in Warlick's store on
Washington's Union Station... and he says it's been a real hit.
   A member of Helms' staff bought a roll for the senator.
   Warlick says he hopes the arch-conservative takes the new item as
humorous. He says Helms took the watch in good stride six years ago.
   The watch had a carricature of the senator, and it measured time by
running backwards.
---------

				    -46-



SQL 1 line 19> insert into test values ('garden', 'garden');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
garden       garden

SQL 1 line 20> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/garden') where y = 'garden';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
garden       



    THE GARDEN of the prince's house was had been beautiful.  It was wild and
yet kept in a trimmed way by an old gardener. At the moment it was bathed in
intense sunlight and deep, complex shadows.  The range of colors was
breathtaking -- pale lime, bitter emerald, mid-tones, neutral tints.  The house
was surrounded by tall, slender pines and old gnarled oaks and cedars. The
texture of the leaves were many and varied and communicated themselves through
sight to imaginary touch, exciting the senses;  the leaves were of the
tenderest flesh, superb in their prime, crisping to old age;  in this magic
land, there were no changing seasons.  In the shadows there were dark blue
veils, indigo dreams of plants fallen asleep, and odours of sweet decay.
Numerous places were layered with cast-off fruit of other years softened into
compost, feeding the ravenous living roots that interlaced the dark rich earth
beneath the grass lines that swept away from the veranda.
    From the house there came the sound of a young girl's voice, carried softly
on the evening breeze, praising the goddess who was overseeing the lush
twilight.  She sang the song of the young bride saying goodbye to her parents,
before setting out on the journey to her new home far away. There are songs for
the morning and evening to celebrate the lives and loves of the gods and
goddesses, both past and present.  This one was for the evening.  The garden
was cooling and quiet.  A blue-black crow with a red-yellow beak swooped from
the tiled roof of the house looking for its supper.  Where the dying sunlight
struck the lawn, gathering evening dew-drops looked liked a scattering of
crystals.
    The lawn was surrounded by bushes of white and red bougainvillaea.  Some of
the bushes were hybrids and had branches that bore sprays of both colours.
Elsewhere, there were jasmine and beds of dark-red lilies.
    The house and garden stood on a hill, protected from the outside world by
close-formed battalions of trees.  There were tamarind, casuarina, banyan, ash,
oak, cedar, pipul . . .
    Two generations before a prince had built the house to install a beautiful
young girl from the village at the bottom of the hill as an expensive way of
impressing her father -- as if, indeed, a prince had need to impress a wealthy
merchant who was secretly panicking over finding a husband for his eldest
daughter.  The prince visited the girl in this house every morning and every
evening, wooing her, and begging her to sing to him.  She sang mournful,
plaintive songs, and such a song was what the wind was now carrying, a memory
of that young girl from the bottom of the hill, who died of a broken heart so
many years before.
    The prince grieved for his requited love, and commanded his court musicians
to record her songs and learn them, finally becoming enamoured, not of the
girl's form, but of her spirit contained within the songs that endured long
past her death and spoke of how she had guarded her honour to the last breath.
    The prince's son despised his father's weakness with the girl, however, and
closed the house, leaving the garden like his kingdom to fall into ruin and
decay.  The young prince built another house nearby for his courtesans and
rough friends, emptying the treasury and not caring that his people starved
both physically and spiritually.  A stranger in his court was poisoned, and
then it was revealed the stranger was a diplomat from a land far away.  War
seemed imminent, so the prince was deposed by his generals and ministers.  The
people were glad that such a burden had been taken from their shoulders, and
the garden, once filled with tangled, strangling weeds seem to free itself from
their influence and reassert a calm over the land and in the heart of the
leaders.
    The garden was now occupied by ghosts, and the voice of the young girl was,
in fact, the spirit of that merchant's eldest daughter still trapped in the
living wood beams and rafters.  At times she could be seen -- a pale sight,
dressed in the fashion of her day, standing on the verandah, swaying to and
fro, her arms cupped before her chest as if nursing a baby, though her arms are


                                      -1-





empty.
    The grandson of the prince was now busy rebuilding and reclaiming the house
and garden, cleansing his family's and the kingdom's honour and the symbol of
that honour -- the garden.  The house itself had a flagged inner courtyard;
verandahs with rounded arches shading the up[per as well as the ground floor
rooms.  The brickwork was stuccoed and painted cream that always dried to a
pale yellow.  Stone steps led from the gravelled driveway to the front entrance
that had peonies and colourful vines wrapped around the lintel.  In the arches
of the verandahs roses hung from the balustrade on the upper floors, while from
the lower bright red explosions of hyacinths filled in the gap between earth
and crafted wood.  Where the clusters were only leaves there were clay pots
that had been filled with shrubs and flowers, while climbing plants embraced
the pillars of the arches.
    An old man with a grizzled face, dressed in a white vest and cheesecloth
pants tied with twine, moved in a stiff arthritic way as he carefully tended
the plants with gnarled fingers.  His skin was burnt purple and tanned by the
wind and his bare toes clung to the ground, horny as the shell of a turtle.
    What made this evening so special was that after a lifetime of tending the
plants for the young prince, and glimpsing the ghostly figure of the girl,
hearing her voice carried softly on the wind -- she for the first time spoke
directly to the old gardener who fell to his knees in shock and awe.







































                                      -2-



SQL 1 line 21> insert into test values ('gettysbg.txt', 'gettysbg.txt');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
gettysbg.txt gettysbg.txt

SQL 1 line 22> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/gettysbg.txt') where y = 'gettysbg.txt';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
gettysbg.txt 


THE GETTYSBURG ADDRESS:


"Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this 
continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the 
proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in 
a great civil war, testing whether that nation or any nation so 
conceived and so dedicated can long endure. We are met on a great 
battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of 
that field as a final resting-place for those who here gave their 
lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and 
proper that we should do this. But in a larger sense, we cannot 
dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we cannot hallow this ground. 
The brave men, living and dead who struggled here have consecrated 
it far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will 
little note nor long remember what we say here, but it can never 
forget what they did here. It is for us the living rather to be 
dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here 
have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here 
dedicated to the great task remaining before us--that from these 
honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which 
they gave the last full measure of devotion--that we here highly 
resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain, that this 
nation under God shall have a new birth of freedom, and that 
government of the people, by the people, for the people shall 
not perish from the earth."

-------------------------------------

Prepared by Gerald Murphy (The Cleveland Free-Net - aa300)
Distributed by the Cybercasting Services Division of the
  National Public Telecomputing Network (NPTN).

Permission is hereby granted to download, reprint, and/or otherwise
  redistribute this file, provided appropriate point of origin
  credit is given to the preparer(s) and the National Public
  Telecomputing Network.





SQL 1 line 23> insert into test values ('kids', 'kids');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
kids         kids

SQL 1 line 24> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/kids') where y = 'kids';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
kids         



A CHAMPION'S SCHOOLING IN ANOTHER WORLD:

Heroes ventured where the mass of humankind dared not tread-into the shifting
shadow worlds that once lay hidden within the solid landscapes of everyday.
The voyages were perilous, but the rewards were great:  On one such journey,
the Irish warrior Cuchulain passed from youth to manhood.

His adventure began as a test:  Cuchulain desired a woman called Emer the Fair,
whose father demanded that he prove himself at the school of the legendary
woman warrior Scathach.  She ruled Alba, a land far beyond the mist and
spindrift of the restless Irish Sea.

With three companions, Cuchulain sailed to Alba's rocky shore.  In days the
companions vanished, seduced away, it was said by magic.  The young Ulster
warrior traveled on alone, heading north until he came to a plain that
stretched to the rim of the sky, where bony mountain ranges loomed. Steaming
and shivering, the plain was bad land;  it seethed with spells. Cuchulain
hesitated, and when he did, a child appeared to him, offering talismans.  If he
wished to find Scathach, said the strange child gravely, he must follow the
talismans.

Cuchulain took them. The first was a wheel, which he cast on the plain.  At
once the wheel glowed gold and of its own rolled off. As the child had advised,
Cuchulain followed, although on either side pitch welled up, black, boiling and
deep enough to trap a man forever.

In the wheel's track he was safe. When the golden disk vanished, Cuchulain
threw the second talisman-a golden apple-and followed as it rolled ahead. On
either side, swaying like grain in the wind, grew glittering knives, sharp
enough to sever a man's legs.  In the apple's track, however, Cuchulain was
untouched and thus passed in safety the outer barriers to Scathach's world.

He left the plain at last and trudged on, ascending steadily into darkening
mountains, until, at dusk he saw the fortress of the woman warrior. Perched on
a cold promontory, the stronghold was embraced by a windy chasm.  The pit was
arched by a narrow bridge.  Encamped on the ledge in front of the bridge were
the youths who would become the Ulsterman's companions in training, the warrior
band of Scathach. They were a fine crew, bright-haired and strong-limbed. They
jeered at him, an unproven stranger.  One shouted to Cuchulain that he should
try the bridge, and that was a trick, for the bridge of its own power could
cast the foolhardy into the chasm below.

Cuchulain leaped onto the span. Like a wave beneath him, the bridge swayed and
buckled;  he felt it snap upward and landed, gasping, back on the ledge.  The
youths jeered the louder. He tried again and once again, and each time, the
bridge tossed him to the ledge amid a chorus of derision.

Cuchulain brightened with rage then, and the hero light blazed aournd his head,
so that his tormentors fell silent. They saw him leap once more into the air,
touch the bridge and spring across the span as a salmon leaps upstream. With a
spear, he struck the fortress gates. Behind him, the bridge swayed supple as
silk in the wind.

It was the last barrier.  The massive fortress gates swung open.  Knowing
Cuchulain's worth, Scathach received him:  only the valiant could breach her
barriers, and around this man's head shone the glowing light of the hero.

Thus she took Cuchulain into her company and trained him.  He spent long months


                                      -1-





in Alba, learning battle skills charged with magic, skills so strange that
while their names were long remembered, later generations, having lost the
arts, could not tell exactly what the skills might be. Some of their names
were:  the blade feat, the spear feat, the rope feat, the salmon feat and the
whirl of the brave chariot chief.

Cuchulain learned well, so well that no one lacking other-world training-and
few in Alba itself-would be a match fo him. He led Scathach's band. He fought
for her in her own battles and thereby got his only son:

As Cuchlain's training neared its end, a rival of Scathach's thundered through
the mountain passes at the head of an invading army. The challenger was called
Aifa, and she was a warrior queen of great prowess. Scathach's cadre of heroes
met the invaders, but it was Cuchulain alone who slew Aifa's champions. Then,
as was the custom, Aifa challenged Scathach to single combat.

But Cuchulain demanded to stand for his mentor.  Although he was warned of
Aifa's ferocity, all he asked was to know what she cherished.  Scathach told
him:  Aifa loved her horses, chariot and charioteer. Then Cuchulain went forth
to battle.

They fought with spears, but the spears shattererd harmlessly. The two were
closely matched in spear play. When they turned to swords, however, the woman
swiftly disarmed the man, her blade flashing up in the dusty air and breaking
Cuchulain's from its hilt.

But the Ulsterman was crafty. He shouted that Aifa's chariot and horses had
stumbled at the cliff edge and were in danger of sliding over. Caught by the
trick, Aifa turned her gaze for one instant, and in that instant, Cuchulain
seized her in his arms.

His grip was like iron;  he threw Aifa to the ground and pressed his dagger to
her throat, demanding surrender.  And she yielded to him.  She promised that
she would fight Scathach no more.  She said that she would give herself to
Cuchulain, who had conquered her. Thus Cuchulain took Aifa to her camp. and
kept her by him for some weeks.  He got her with child in that time and told
her what he knew in his heart. The child, Cuchulain said, would be a son.

"Send the boy to me in Ulster when he is seven," said Cuchulain.  Without
another word, he left Aifa, never seeing the light of vengeance that gleamed
behind her eyes.

Cuchulain's appointed year in Alba had drawn to its close, and so he returned
to Scathach's fortress to make his farewell. The chieftainess then gave him who
was the pride of her pupils the greatest of spears, the gae bolga. She blessed
his valor. And she made this prophecy:  that Cuchulain would triumph, one man
over multitudes;  that his greatness would live forever in the poets' songs;
that his life would pass as quickly as the dew.

Cuchulain cared everything for the fame and nothing for the brevity of the
warrior's life. He returned to Ulster, to the bride he had won and the glory
that was to come. But he never spared a thought for his child, left behind in
the shadow world of Alba.


THE GREAT KING'S LAST BATTLE:

The fellowship of the round Table was undone on a fine day in May, when King


                                      -2-





Arthur was old and tired and his court rife with secret factions. The King and
his champion, Lancelot, had enemies in the court, and chief among them was
Mordred, Arthur's bastard son. Mordred had four half brothers:  Agravain, as
spiteful as Mordred himself;  and Gawain, Gaheris and Gareth, steadfastly
faithful to Lancelot and the King. When Mordred and Agravain made their move,
their brothers flatly refused to join in it.

Mordred was determined to show that Lancelot was the Queen's lover and thus a
traitor to his King. One night, therefore, Mordred and Agravain - with twelve
companion knights - armed themselves and stole up the winding stair that led to
the Queen's chamber. They pounded on the door. Lancelot answered. He was indeed
with the Queen - long his lover - and unarmed.  But the knights could not press
their advantage, crowded as they were on the shadowy stair. Lancelot opened the
door;  he pulled the first knight, who was Colgrevaunce, into the chamber and
slammed the door again.  While the Queen watched, he killed Colgrevaunce with
the man's own sword. Then, in Colegrevaunce's armor, he hacked his way down the
stair, slaughtering all the conspirators except Mordred the talebearer, who
fled.

Lancelot and his supporters retreated to his own fortress, Joyous Garde.
Mordred went to the King with his story. And Arthur, trapped by the law he
himself had made, condemned his wife Guinevere to burn for her infidelity,
although it grieved him and his own knights bitterly protested.

But in the gray dawn of the execution morning, when Guinevere was bound to the
stake, Lancelot and his men charged through the throng to rescue the Queen.  In
the fight to reach her, Lancelot struck out blindly and, all unknowing, killed
Gareth and Gaheris, both unarmed. He freed the Queen and set her on his own
horse, and took her to his fortress.

When he heard of the slaying of his brothers, Gawain wept. And although he was
Lancelot's friend - and staunchest supporter against Mordred's intrigues he
swore revenge.  With Arthur's armies Gawain laid siege to Joyous Garde and
called upon Lancelot to meet him in single combat - the custom since the
earliest age of heroes.  But Lancelot refused to fight Gawain or the King, for
he loved them.  He withstood the siege for months, until men of the Church
persuaded Arthur to take Guinevere back. She went;  it was her duty.  Lancelot
and Guinevere said their farewells then.  Lancelot and his company went in
exile to his lands in France.

The fellowship was broken, the bright honor of the Round Table stained. Arthur
and his company returned to silent Camelot, and Arthur waited for the final
act.

Gawain brought it about;  he insisted that Arthur's honor be avenged. And at
last, with Gawain at the head of his army. Arthur traveled to France to battle
Lancelot. He left his son, Mordred, as regent in England.

For months, the armies fought in France, until Lancelot's land was laid waste.
Each day, Gawain challenged his old friend to single combat, and each day
Lancelot refused, until Gawain called down scorn upon his honor. Lancelot
agreed to fight.

They met in the field before Lancelot's fortress gates.  All the morning
Gawain's strength waxed, and Lancelot, well aware of the uncanny power that was
in his friend and enemy, husbanded his strength. When noon came, they fought
on, but Gawain's strength gradually waned, until it was like that of other
mortals, and Lancelot found the opening to strike Sir Gawain down.


                                      -3-





Gawain lay in the dust, bright blood pouring from his broken skull, and
implored Lancelot to finish him.  But Lancelot refused. "It goes against my
honor to strike a man I have felled," he said. "When you can stand, I will
fight you again." And he turned and left.

So an uneasy truce was kept while Gawain healed. He met Lancelot again to
fight, and again Lancelot gave way in the morning and triumphed in the
afternoon. Again his sword cleaved Gawain's skull, and again the blood poured
onto the ground.  Gawain has been felled, yet Lancelot would not strike his old
companion where he lay.

They were not fated to fight again, however for word reached them of Mordred
the traitor, who had usurped the throne. He had tried, too, to marry Gunievere,
his father's wife;  it was she who sent appeals for help.

Then Arthur swore to kill his son, and sailed for home.  The armies met on
Salisbury Plain;  the flower of chivalry died that day. And as he had sworn,
Arthur found Mordred and put his spear through the author of his grief. But
Mordred did not die at once. Howling like an animal, he thrust himself forward
on the spear until his belly met the handguard, and with his broadsword he
struck his father's head, through helmet and hair and bone to brain. Then
Mordred fell.

Arthur sank to the ground. The battlefield was still, save for the moans of the
wounded and the scrabbling of the looters who crept among the bodies. The King
closed his eyes a moment, fighting for consciousness, for he had something left
to do. When he opened them he saw a faithful face;  Sir Bedevere, one of the
few companions left alive, bent over him and whispered his name.

King Arthur commanded Bedevere to take the last action:  His sword, Excalibur,
must be returned to the waters whence it had come and to the people of the
other world who had made the great blade. There was a lake near the field,
still and mist-shrouded, and into this lake the reluctant Bedevere threw the
sword. It did not strike the water:  A hand broke the surface and seized
Excalibur in the air. Without a ripple, hand and sword vanished.

It was said that Bedevere carried the King to the lake edge then, and both
watched as a silk-draped boat glided through the mist. In the boat were tall
women sheathed in black;  they took the wounded King into their arms and glided
away over the water with him, and Bedevere wept to see the end.

He thought - and others thought - that Arthur had not died. The women, it was
said, were the company of the enchantress Morgan le Fay, who took Arthur to the
Isle of Apples, Avalon, to heal and protect him until England should need him
again.

And as for Guinevere, she retired to a nunnery, where she died. Lancelot, it
was said, went into the wilderness, where he, too, died. And Bedevere and the
few knights who had survived scattered, to journey forever alone in foreign
lands. When they were old, they told the tales of their youth and of the
shining fellowship they once had, when Arthur ruled Britain and true men fought
with the honor of the valiant.


TREACHERY OF THE NEBELUNGS:

Glory and treachery, early death and endless sorrow - these were the threads
that Scandinavian poets wove into songs about Sigurd, the last of Denmark's


                                      -4-





Volsung clan. The Volsungs were a race of heroes descended from the gods.  True
to his high lineage, Sigurd had barely reached manhood when he slew a dragon
that stood baleful watch over a treasure hoard. He capped the conquest by
bathing in the beast's blood. This made his flesh invulnerable, save for one
place on his shoulder where a linden leaf had fallen and covered his skin while
he took the gruesome bath.

After his encounter with the dragon, Sigurd rode south in search of new
adventure. Before many days passed, he spied a pillar of smoke rising from a
mountain peak and, eager to know the cause, guided his horse Greyfell up the
slope. As he neared the summit, he saw that the mountain itself burned:  The
peak was ringed with ramparts of fire.

Sigurd spurred his horse straight toward the flame, and Greyfell went willingly
hoofs hammering on the burning coals as if on cold pebbles. As they entered the
fire, it subsided to flickering tongues of flame and then died to ashes.
Sigurd saw what it had shielded:  a stone bier, and on the bier, the goldclad
body of a warrior.

Dismounting, he removed the warrior's helmet. A wealth of golden hair tumbled
out, framing a sternly beautiful face.  He cut the throngs that held the
glittering breastplate. The warrior was a woman. Moreover, she was alive:
Sigurd had evidently awakened her from a magical sleep.

For a moment, the woman gazed gravely up at him. then, with the litheness of
the battle-trained, she sprang to her feet and stood before him. She spoke, and
Sigurd's heart leaped within his breast. Sigurd had breached the fire fortress,
the woman warrior said, and only the bravest of mortals could do so. She was
therefore his.

This woman was a hero's prize indeed, as Sigurd recognized when she told him
her name:  Brynhild.  She was a Valkyrie, one of the heroic troop of near
goddesses who rode the clouds high above a battlefield, choosing the warriors
who would perish in glory. Once, however, she had chosen a warrior before his
appointed time, and she had been condemned to live among humankind and learn
its sorrows. But because she was a Valkyrie, she was sent into a deep sleep,
secure in the fire fortress, so that only the greatest of heroes, he who braved
the flames, should have her.

For a time - none knew how long - Sigurd and Brynhild taled together, and at
last they pledged their troth. In token of his vow, Sigurd gave the Valkyrie a
ring that he had taken from the dragon's hoard;  she gave him runic charms to
keep him high-hearted and strengthen his sword. then the mortal rode away to
find a king to serve - and deeds to do to make him worthy of this woman of the
clouds. Behind him, the Valkyrie sank once more onto her bier. The flames
sprang up, guarding her until Sigurd should claim her again.

Sigurd traveled long months through the world, finally reaching the land of the
Nibelungs, a forest tribe ruled by a King called Giuki. Sigurd's air of honor
and courage won him entrance to the King's hall, and his tale of dragon gold
and of his Valkyrie won him the attention of the Queen. Grimhild was her name,
she was a sorceress, and she ruled only by ambition for her children.

As she listened to the warrior's tale, the thought came to her that he was a
fitting match for her dauthter Gudrun. At once she devised a way to achieve
this end, offering the warrior a cup of wine tainted by her dark arts. Sigurd's
mind clouded, and the memory of his battle maiden sliped away. Beside him stood
Gudrun, tender and fair;  his heart moved toward her.


                                      -5-





Not many weeks passed before Sigurd married Gudrun, just as the sorceress had
planned. Gudrun's family became his, and Sigurd was as a brother to her
brothers - to Guttorm and Hogni and especially to Gunnar, the eldest and the
best. Sigurd and Gunnar hunted together and went to war together, and they
swore eternal friendship.

Then Grimhild, who watched all her children's doings closely, was ready to make
her second match. She sent her son Gunnar to woo Brynhild, finest of maidens,
and she sent Sigurd to aid him, Sigurd, his mind still held by the sorceress's
magic, the memory of his promies gone, was eager to help his companion and
brother, in this matter as in all others.

The two young men traveled to Brynhild's enchanted mountain. Sigurd held back
while Gunnar charged the fire fortress. Gunnar's horse refused to breach the
ring of flames. Then Gunnar tried again with Sigurd's horse, but Greyfell would
move for no rider other than Sigurd.

In the end, they used a ruse - as Grimhild no doubt had anticipated would be
necessary, for she had sent with them the magic that made it. With the aid of
spells, the young men exchanged shape;  in the guise of Gunnar, Sigurd charged
the flames and approached the Valkryie. Brynhild found a stranger by her bier.
She believed than that Sigurd must be dead, for only the greatest warrior in
the world could breach her wall of flame. This man had clearly taken Sigurd's
place in honor and valor. Grieving, she gave him her golden ring and agreed
that, as her own fate demanded, she would marry him.

Strife came into the family of the Nibelung Kings at the wedding feast of its
eldest son. Beside Gunnar and Brynhild in the hall sat Sigurd with his wife,
Gudrun, and Gudrun wore upon her hand the golden ring of the dragon hoard.
Brynhild stared. It was the very same Sigurd she had loved, tall, handsome,
with a broad brow and hair like curled copper. He met her eyes and looked
away.

In the days that followed, the women quarreled. Gudrun had seen the Valkyrie's
look of longing for her husband, and she did not like it. She told Brynhild
what Sigurd had said secretly) and innocently, having lost all memory of his
vow to Brynhild):  He had wooed Brynhild for Gunnar. Gudrun showed the golden
ring that Sigurd had kept as his reward and given to her, his wife, to wear.

Then Brynhild turned away from her husband, Gunnar, with contempt. It was not
he who had ridden through the ring of flames, and the trick he had used brought
shame to her. She spoke against Sigurd and demanded that Gunnar kill him to
retrieve his own lost honor.

But Gunnar would not do it. Sigurd, he said, was his blood brother. Brynhild
appealed - as was her right - to Gunnar's younger brother Hogni, who had a
spiteful nature and a taste for treachery. He took on the task . He began with
Sigurd's wife and contrived, with smooth words and protestations of anxiety for
Sigurd's safety, to make that loose-tongued woman reveal to him the one
vulnerability that Sigurd had - the spot on his shoulder that the linden leaf
had covered.

With that knowledge, the task of killing Sigurd was easy. Hogni went hunting
with him one day, deep in the German forests, and watched while Sigurd brought
down the prey. Hot and thirsty the two men raced for a spring to bathe and
drink, and Sigurd won the race.  He rose from the water, wet and laughing, his
back to Hogni. Hogni thrust a spear at his shoulder, the blade entered and
plunged deep.


                                      -6-





Thus die Sigurd. Brynhild, wild with grief, flung herself on his funeral pyre
and gave herself to the flame that she might have him for eternity. As for
Hogni and the rest of the Nibelung brood, they died years later, tricked into
fighting one another by Gudrun, who from the moment of Sigurd's death lived
only for vengeance.























































                                      -7-



SQL 1 line 25> insert into test values ('liberty', 'liberty');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
liberty      liberty

SQL 1 line 26> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/liberty') where y = 'liberty';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
liberty      



Patrick Henry, March 23, 1775.


No man thinks more highly than I do of the patriotism, as well as abilities, of
the very worthy gentlemen who have just addressed the House.  But different men
often see the same subject in different lights;  and, therefore, I hope it will
not be thought disrespectful to those gentlemen if, entertaining as I do
opinions of a character very opposite to theirs, I shall speak forth my
sentiments freely and without reserve. This is no time for ceremony.  The
questing before the House is one of awful moment to this country.  For my own
part, I consider it as nothing less than a question of freedom or slavery;  and
in proportion to the magnitude of the subject ought to be the freedom of the
debate.  It is only in this way that we can hope to arrive at truth, and
fulfill the great responsibility which we hold to God and our country. Should I
keep back my opinions at such a time, through fear of giving offense, I should
consider myself as guilty of treason towards my country, and of an act of
disloyalty toward the Majesty of Heaven, which I revere above all earthly
kings.

Mr. President, it is natural to man to indulge in the illusions of hope.  We
are apt to shut our eyes against a painful truth, and listen to the song of
that siren till she transforms us into beasts. Is this the part of wise men,
engaged in a great and arduous struggle for liberty?  Are we disposed to be of
the number of those who, having eyes, see not, and, having ears, hear not, the
things which so nearly concern their temporal salvation?  For my part, whatever
anguish of spirit it may cost, I am willing to know the whole truth;  to know
the worst, and to provide for it.

I have but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of
experience.  I know of no way of judging of the future but by the past.  And
judging by the past, I wish to know what there has been in the conduct of the
British ministry for the last ten years to justify those hopes with which
gentlemen have been pleased to solace themselves and the House.  Is it that
insidious smile with which our petition has been lately received?  Trust it
not, sir;  it will prove a snare to your feet.  Suffer not yourselves to be
betrayed with a kiss.  Ask yourselves how this gracious reception of our
petition comports with those warlike preparations which cover our waters and
darken our land.  Are fleets and armies necessary to a work of love and
reconciliation?  Have we shown ourselves so unwilling to be reconciled that
force must be called in to win back our love?  Let us not deceive ourselves,
sir.  These are the implements of war and subjugation;  the last arguments to
which kings resort.  I ask gentlemen, sir, what means this martial array, if
its purpose be not to force us to submission?  Can gentlemen assign any other
possible motive for it?  Has Great Britain any enemy, in this quarter of the
world, to call for all this accumulation of navies and armies?  No, sir, she
has none.  They are meant for us:  they can be meant for no other.  They are
sent over to bind and rivet upon us those chains which the British ministry
have been so long forging.  And what have we to oppose to them?  Shall we try
argument?  Sir, we have been trying that for the last ten years.  Have we
anything new to offer upon the subject?  Nothing.  We have held the subject up
in every light of which it is capable;  but it has been all in vain.  Shall we
resort to entreaty and humble supplication?  What terms shall we find which
have not been already exhausted?  Let us not, I beseech you, sir, deceive
ourselves.  Sir, we have done everything that could be done to avert the storm
which is now coming on.  We have petitioned;  we have remonstrated;  we have
supplicated;  we have prostrated ourselves before the throne, and have implored
its interposition to arrest the tyrannical hands of the ministry and
Parliament.  Our petitions have been slighted;  our remonstrances have produced


                                      -1-





additional violence and insult;  our supplications have been disregarded;  and
we have been spurned, with contempt, from the foot of the throne!  In vain,
after these things, may we indulge the fond hope of peace and reconciliation.
There is no longer any room for hope.  If we wish to be free - if we mean to
preserve inviolate those inestimable privileges for which we have been so long
contending - if we mean not basely to abandon the noble struggle in which we
have been so long engaged, and which we have pledged ourselves never to abandon
until the glorious object of our contest shall be obtained - we must fight!  I
repeat it, sir, we must fight!  An appeal to arms and to the God of hosts is
all that is left us!

They tell us, sir, that we are weak;  unable to cope with so formidable an
adversary.  But when shall we be stronger?  Will it be the next week, or the
next year?  Will it be when we are totally disarmed, and when a British guard
shall be stationed in every house?  Shall we gather strength but irresolution
and inaction?  Shall we acquire the means of effectual resistance by lying
supinely on our backs and hugging the delusive phantom of hope, until our
enemies shall have bound us hand and foot?  Sir, we are not weak if we make a
proper use of those means which the God of nature hath placed in our power.
The millions of people, armed in the holy cause of liberty, and in such a
country as that which we possess, are invincible by any force which our enemy
can send against us.  Besides, sir, we shall not fight our battles alone.
There is a just God who presides over the destinies of nations, and who will
raise up friends to fight our battles for us.  The battle, sir, is not to the
strong alone;  it is to the vigilant, the active, the brave.  Besides, sir, we
have no election.  If we were base enough to desire it, it is now too late to
retire from the contest.  There is no retreat but in submission and slavery!
Our chains are forged!  Their clanking may be heard on the plains of Boston!
The war is inevitable - and let it come!  I repeat it, sir, let it come.

It is in vain, sir, to extenuate the matter.  Gentlemen may cry, Peace, Peace -
but there is no peace. The war is actually begun!  The next gale that sweeps
from the north will bring to our ears the clash of resounding arms!  Our
brethren are already in the field!  Why stand we here idle?  What is it that
gentlemen wish?  What would they have?  Is life so dear, or peace so sweet, as
to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery?  Forbid it, Almighty God!
I know not what course others may take;  but as for me, give me liberty or give
me death!






















                                      -2-



SQL 1 line 27> insert into test values ('qadhafi', 'qadhafi');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
qadhafi      qadhafi

SQL 1 line 28> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/qadhafi') where y = 'qadhafi';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
qadhafi      



INTERVIEW WITH MUAMMAR QADHAFI:

'I am a mixture of Washington and Lincoln'

Western journalists jokingly call it "the bar scene from 'Star Wars'"-referring
to the nightly gathering of wildly assorted business people, mullahs,
terrorists and advisers--Soviet and otherwise--in the lobby of the posh Al
Kabir Hotel. "Everyone's waiting to see Qadhafi," explains a Damacus based
Kurdish rebel leader.

Many don't make it. The Libya of Muammar Qadhafi, "the Leader," is no longer
the fountain of money it once was for salesmen of every description. Libya's
more than 3 million people are tightening their belts. Though the breadlines of
last year have all but disappeared, freight cranes in the port of Tripoli are
idle, and Libyans queue up to buy everything from disposable diapers to light
bulbs. At least half the shops on Tripoli's First of September Street have
closed.

Those who do see Qadhafi are mostly certifiable "revolutionary fighters."
Despite a staggering drop in Libya's annual oil revenues--at least $20 billion
since the late '70s-- he continues to finance a long list of terrorist groups.
"There's been no slowdown in funds or backing for revolution," says a Moscow
educated member of Georges Habash's Popular front for the Liberation of
Palestine. Nor is there any lessening of the frenzied anti-Semitishm and open
hatred of the Reagan administration tht permeate both government and public.

The image of Qadhafi as terrorist leader has changed, however, since the U .S.
air strike last April in retaliation for a Libya-sponsored bombing in West
Berlin. The image is no less violent, but with the unmasking of Syria's Hafez
Assad as a calculating manipulator of state terrorism who tries to deny his
role, Qadhafi appears as much an erratic cash cow as a guiding genius of
revolution.

Qadhafi rarely has been seen in public since the raid. But one evening in late
October, wearing a stylish jump suit, he climbed the red-carpeted stairs of his
mansion, which had been damaged in the American attack. There, surrounded by
pieces of shattered glass and marble, he talked with U.S. News & World Report
Senior Correspondent Richard Z. Chesnonff and American writer Barbara Victor,
author of Terrorism, who is now at work on a book about Qadhafi.

Q Colonel Qadhafi, is there any way to break the stalemate between the U.S.
and Libya?

When there is a change in the President of the United States, there will be
understanding not only between our two countries but with other countries as
well. Reagan now represents the interests of the Israelis, and he under the
influence of his foreign minister, who is an Israeli.

Q But Secretary of State Shultz is an American, born in the U.S.?

He's sacrificing the interests of the Americans in favor the Israelis. The
bombing raid on Libya was for the interests of the Israelis, because there is
no Libyan-American problem.

Q What you refer to as "support of liberation movements" Americans see as
terrorism?

What you view as terrorism is the Palestinian struggle for liberation against


                                      -1-





the Israelis. and whatever Reagan is calling terrorism is actually a struggle
of the people's liberation movement against terrorism.

What the Americans are doing is a terrorist act, and what the Israelis are
doing is a terrorist act. What the Palestinians, Nicaraguans, the Lebanese are
doing--this is a liberation movement.

Q But this "struggle" results in American deaths?

Exactly. America will be harmed because it involved itself for the benefit of
the Israelis.

Q What is the resolution of the Palestinian question?

There is no resolution. The Palestinian people, behind the Arab nation, will
continue fighting till the end.

Q Is the end the destruction of Israel?  Is that the final solution?

Maybe the destruction of the Arabs, maybe the destruction of Israel.

Q What's your reaction to suggestions that there was a Reagan admininstration
disinformation campaign against you?

The American people sit accused because they have not yet tried Reagan and his
gang for this scandal of disinformation, which outdid the Watergate scandal.
Also, they have not even tried him for this crime that you see here (pointing
to the rubble around him)--as a killer and a murderer and a madman.  Does this
serve the interests of the American people?  Does this build friendship?

Q There were reports that after the bombing raid you were deeply depressed?

This is part of the disinformation campaign, because during that period I was
out with the people more than normal.

Q Do you think President Reagan treid to kill you?

You can see (lauhing and gest uring to the ruinds surrounding him). He should
be treid as a killer, as a murdered.

Q Have the events of the last six months altered your support of what the U.S.
considers terrorist movements?

We have increased our support for the liberation movements of the Palestinians
and for all liberation movements throughout the world. To react to this
aggression, we have doubled our efforts with the liberation movements.

Q Even if your activities provoke a similar response from the U.S. government?

Even if they hit us with the atomic bombs!

Q Do the Abu Nidal and Georges Habash groups (both linked to terrorism) use
Libya as a base for their operations?

Libya is open for the Palestinians.

Q Is the Soviet Union still behind you as solidly as before?



                                      -2-





We are satisfied with the relationship with the Soviet Union--with our
friendship with the Soviet Union.

Q Would you comment on the recent break in relations between Great Britain and
Syria?

The West is mad!  It's still with the spirit of the Crusades. They would like
to enable the Israelis to control the Arab world, and they want to destroy the
Arabs. It's a colonial policy that has not changed.

Q Is there a difference in your mind between anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism, or
anti-Jewishness?

We don't hate the Jews, because some Libyans are Jews and some Arabs are Jews
and Judaism is a religion.

We don't hate religion;  we are against Zionism.  More clearly, we are against
colonialism. We would consider Palestine as occupied by these people-whatever
name you give them--even if they were Moslems. They are occupying Palestine,
and they have to be resisted.

I don't think a reasonable man can support Israel. This is a tyrant entity and
a terrorist one, and it is manufacturing atomic weapons. Why don't you stand by
the Palestinian people, who are persecuted and being displaced from their
lands?

Why did the Jews come from Europe to Palestine?  Because you persecute them in
Europe. They should get their rights as European citizens. We shouldn't pay the
price of the persecution of the Jews.

Q If Palestine were to go back into the hands of the Palestinians, where would
the Israelis go?

Most of them came as invaders from Europe and Russian, and they must go back to
their homes. The Arabs stayed 800 years in Spain, and then they came back.

Q But the Jews originated in Palestine, too?

We accept the Jews who were living with us before 1948--for thousands of
year,of course. These are Oriental Jews. But the others are all invaders.  the
right of the Arabs to resist is much stronger than Reagan and all of his
might.

Q The Arabs have been fighting among themselves for decades. Why are they so
disunited?

Because of Western colonization. Because the Arab homeland is divided into 20
countries because of the Western colonization.

Q Would a leader other than Yassir Arafat be more effective in uniting factions
within the Palestine Liberation Organization?

Generally, Yassir Arafat has failed. Who's going to be the alternative is
unknown yet.

Q Is it conceivable that Americans will face attacks by "liberation movements"
inside the United States?  Would you support the activities of such groups?



                                      -3-





Peoples have the right to defend themselves and to react to aggression.

Q Does a resolution of the Palestinian issue depend on unity within the Arab
world?

Of course. Why does America object to unity of the Arab nation?  This means
that the struggle of Abraham Lincoln was terrorism and was wrong. Why does the
United States object to liberation of Arab land?  This means that George
Washington's liberation was wrong and was terrorism.

Arab unity is a unification of Arab countries into states like the United
States. This is the role I am playing--a mixture of the roles of George
Washington and Abraham Lincoln.

Q Would you like to lead such a united Arab world?

(Smiling broadly) Yes. Why not?

Q What are your feelings about the fact that thousands of your fellow Moslems
in Afghanistan have died at the hands of Soviet troops?

This is a problem that concerns the people of Afghanistan.

America also occupies many countries at the request of those countries. It had
five bases here at the request of the Libyan government before the revolution.
Why didn't you consider this as occupation?

Q Has the tremendous drop in world oil prices caused Libya to adjust its
priorities, its standard of living?

It is the Western oil companies that are affected primarily, because they lost
a lot of revenue. No, we have not been affected.

I have one observation to make. Now, there are two different ideological lines
in the world--the Third World:  Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Arab
homeland. They are in labor of revolution either toward Marxism, which is
prevailing--the traditional direction, like Cuba and Ethiopia--or the
Jamahiriya. Libya is a Jamahiriya, a "state of the masses." Grenada, for
example, during the time of Maurice Bishop:  He was following the Jamahiriya
line. There was a Marxist coup against him and he was killed. Then came the
American intervention. Cuba, on the other hand, got the other direction, the
Marxist direction.

The war launched by America against Nicaragua, Grenada, Cuba--this is
compelling these countries to go Marxist. It's like you put pressure on Castro
to become a Communist. I am not a Communist, but I might be obliged--just to
nag America--to become a Communist out of spite.













                                      -4-



SQL 1 line 29> insert into test values ('socrates', 'socrates');
     x            y      
------------+------------+
socrates     socrates

SQL 1 line 30> update test set y=fromfiletext('text/socrates') where y = 'socrates';
     x            y      
------------+------------+
socrates     



                              PLATO

                     SUMMARY OF THE REPUBLIC

Socrates, Glaucon, Polemarchos, Thrasymachos, Adeimantos, Cephalos


BOOK I:

Polemarchos invites Socrates and Glaucon to visit his father Cephalos' house.
Various other friends are there as well.  Cephalos talks about old age:
eventually the conversation turns to the subject of justice.  How do you define
justice?  asks Socrates.  Polemarchos puts forward Simonides' definition - to
render what is due - but this on examination proves unsatisfactory.  Here
Thrasymachos breaks in, maintaining that the whole conversation so far has
consisted of nothing but pious platitudes.  Justice, he says, is whatever suits
the strongest best. Might is right.  A ruler is always just.  Socrates suggests
that even a ruler sometimes makes a mistake, and orders his subjects to do
someting which is really not to his advantage at all.  Is he just when he does
this?  Thrasymachos answers that in so far as he is mistaken he is not a true
ruler.  Socrates then argues that a doctor is primarily concerned to heal the
sick, and only incidentally to make money:  similarly, medicine seeks not its
own advantage but the advantage of the human body.  By analogy a ruler seeks
the advantage of his subjects, not of himself.

Thrasymachos then rushes off on a new tack.  Injustice, he says, is virtuous,
and justice is vicious.  Justice is everywhere at the mercy of injustice, which
is reviled not because men fear to do it but because they fear to suffer it.
Socrates sets out to disprove this view, and establishes that justice is
apparently wise and virtuous, and at the same time more profitable than
injustice.  But, he says, he is still without a definition of justice.


BOOK II:

Glaucon and Adeimantos then develop further objections to Socrates'
conclusions.  Is justice, says Glaucon, any more than society's refuge from the
consequences of the doctrine that true success depends on being as unjust as
possible?  Has it really a value for its own sake?  Whereupon his brother
Adeimantos adds that everybody is in fact as unjust as he can be without being
found out;  is there any value in justice itself, he asks, as distinct from a
reputation for justice?

At this stage Socrates suggests that the nature of justice is more easily to be
discovered in the macrocosm, the state, than in the microcosm, the individual.
This is agreed and the discussion shifts to the origins and composition of a
city-state.  People associate for mutual support, because different men have
different abilities.  Society flourishes because it is efficient:  it enables
each person to devote himself to the task he is best fitted for, and saves him
from dispersing his energies in other tasks he is not fitted for at all, and
which he will thereofre perform indifferently.

Socrates then describes the various classes of persons in a city, ending with
the highest class, the rulers or guardians, who require the highest qualities.
They must be both courageous and philosophical, both brave and wise.  How are
these qualities to be developed?

This leads to the subject of education, which, Socrates says, seems to consist


                                      -1-





of gymnastic for the body and music (in the broad sense of the arts) for the
soul. He takes literature, a part of music, first of all, because education
begins, he says, in the nursery, with fables and fairy stories.  These must be
very carefully censored to ensure a suitable moral tone;  and in particular the
gods must always appear in a virtuous light.  God must be portrayed as the
author of good only, not of evil, and as incapable of falsehood.


BOOK III:

Literature, Socrates continues, must deal only with suitable subjects, and only
in a suitable manner.  He prescribes in some detail as to both subject and
form:  in effect, the poet may tell only plain stories of virtuous people.  The
same considerations apply to music, as we mean the word:  none but the Dorian
and Phrygian, the manly and sober modes, are to be allowed, and those rhythms
expressive of an orderly and brave life.  The practice in the other arts is to
be similarly regulated;  and in the result a noble art, purified of
unwholesomeness and extravagance, will develop in the young the characteristics
of nobility.  By learning to appreciate the good and the beautiful in art, they
will learn to love them in life.

In gymnastic, as in music, a wholesome simplicity is prescribed.  There will be
in the city little disease and few lawsuits.  But care must be taken to hold
the balance between music and gymnastic:  excess in the former leads to
effeminacy, and excess in the latter to harshness.  It is a mistake to suppose
that music trains the soul while gymnastic trains the body:  gymnastic is as
much a part of the soul's education as music is, and the noblest natures, at
once brave and wise, require a harmonious blend of the two.

From the noblest natures, Socrates goes on, the rulers of the city will be
chosen - the best of the older men, selected for their devotion to the state by
various tests and carefully groomed for office.  They will be assisted by the
lower class of guardians, the auxiliaries or soldiers.  Their rule over the
city will be supported by the mystical sanction of the myth of the three
metals, gold, silver and iron. And they will not live the life of princes, but
the simple life of soldiers, free from the distractions of wealth and luxury.


BOOK IV:

Adeimantos remarks that the arrangements for the guardians do not sound very
inviting.  Socrates replies that this is not the point, even if it is a true
criticism, which he doubts;  he is concerned not with the happiness of parts
but with one harmonious whole, the happy city. The unity of this city, he says,
depends mainly on three principles - equal shares for all, so that there are no
rich and no poor;  a physical limit of size;  and the recognition of merit
regardless of birth.  These precepts are to be safeguarded by the educational
system previously laid down, and all else will then follow - a perfectly
arranged city which will endure as long as the purity of the system itself is
maintained.

If this is the perfect city it must contain justice, and besides, wisdom,
courage and temperance.  Wisdom, says Socrates, is to be found in the thinking
element, the guardians, and it is the knowledge in the light of which they lead
the city. Courage or spirit, the quality of the soldiers, is the preserver of
the constitution from the twin dangers of war and sedition.  Temperance is
common to all three classes, and is the harmonious and beneficial relationship
between them.  Now for justice - which is the virtue that enables all the


                                      -2-





others to flourish, and is none other than the old principle put forward in
Book II, by which each class does the work for which it is fitted without
presuming upon the preserves of the others.

So much for the city.  Applying this argument to the individual, Socrates finds
that the three classes in the state are reflected in three elements in the
soul, the reasoning, the spirited, and the desiring, corresponding to the
counsellors, the assistants or soldiers, and the producers.  Justice is
therefore the due arrangement of these three elements in their proper stations
in the soul, namely that the reasoning part rules, with its auxiliary the
spirited part, over the desiring part.

Socrates then begins to discuss the nature of injustice, and the five types of
political structures. One type, the only good one, has been dealt with;  the
other four are all more or less bad.


BOOK V:

Socrates is here interrupted by Polemarchos, who asks him to fill in the
outline of the perfect city in more detail, before going on to the degenerate
ones.  This leads to a long digression, the main theme being picked up again at
the start of Book VIII.

After a little preliminary skirmishing Socrates deals with the position of
women in the perfect city.  Woman, he says, is the weaker sex;  but there are
no occupations for which a woman is unfitted merely because she is a woman.  He
then describes a society in which all institutions and relationships are
ruthlessly subordinated to the preservation of the unity of the state, and
private life as well as private property are rejected. The city-state thus
becomes the smallest as well as the largest - in fact the only - unity of
social life.  Socrates is just starting to investigate the nature of wars, and
the difference between civil war and foreign war, when Glaucon asks the
fundamental question whether the perfect city, desirable as it may be, can ever
possibly be achieved in fact.  No, replies Socrates, unless there comes about a
union of wisdom and power in the person of the philosopher-king.

In the rest of Book V Socrates defines what he means by philosopher, a lover of
wisdom.  True knowledge is concerned not with the physical world of the senses
but with the qualities, the realities, that are inherenent in the everyday
world - with Beauty, not with beautiful sounds and colors.  The changing world
of the senses is the object of opinion, but the unchanging world of realities
is the object of true knowledge or wisdom, and it is this wisdom that true
philosophers love.


BOOK VI:

The guardians of the city, then, are to be true philosophers in this strict
sense. Socrates is describing their other good qualities when Adeimantos
objects that in fact philosophers have a very different reputation - of being
knaves or fools or both.  Socrates explains the reasons for this.  A
philosopher will never be a popular hero, because he has no time to waste on
mere party politics, and it is success in this lower sphere alone which earns
the plaudits of the crowd.  But he admits that a large number of professed
philosophers are rascals.  Once corruption sets in, the very excellence of the
philosophic qualities leads to great temptation and great evildoing.  In an
unsympathetic, if not actively hostile, world only a few remain faithful to the


                                      -3-





principles of true philosophy.  These few must be helped and encouraged by
means of the educational system already described;  but philosophy is not a
subject which can be acquired at school or in the teens, it is a lifelong
study, and extra facilities must be provided accordingly.  In sum, says
Socrates, his proposals are desirable if they can be realized, and their
realization is difficult but not impossible.

Socrates then reverts to his definition of justice in Book IV. This, he says,
was a superficial treatment of the subject.  Now he speaks of the highest truth
of all, which underlies justice and all the other virtues.  This, the Idea of
the Good, the guiding star of the soul, is the end of the philosopher's study.
As the sun is the world of sight, the Idea of the Good is to the world of
mind.  He goes on to the four divisions of the Divided Line, a refinement of
the distinction between these two worlds, as already sketched in Book V.  The
physical world of the sun, the domain of opinion, contains in its lower class
images, such as shadows and reflections, and in its higher class physical
objects, such as animals and trees.  The corresponding division in the world of
mind, the domain of knowledge, is between, on the one hand, concepts of a
mathematical type, which depend on given postulates, and on the other hand, the
eternal verities, the Ideas or Ideals, comprehended by dialectic in the light
of the Idea of the Good. The four categories are the subjects of conjecture,
belief, understanding, and the exercise of reason respectively, and partake in
ascending order of clearness and truth.


BOOK VII:

Socrates goes on to the story of the cave, which illustrates the escape of the
philosopher from the fetters and darkness of the physical world of the senses
to the freedom and dazzling radiance of the world of mind.  But, he says, the
philosopher must afterwards return to the cave to enlighten and set at liberty
those still imprisoned there.

How is this escape made possible?  By the study of a class of subjects which
deal in abstractions:  these are arithmetic, the study of numbers, and, of less
importance, plane and solid geometry, astronomy so far as it concerns the
principles of movement of solids, and harmonics, the study of sound.  All these
have a practical application, but their real value lies in their power to lead
the soul out of the darkness of the changing world of the senses towards the
light of the unchanging world of mind.  Fortified by these exercises in
abstract thought, the soul at last learns, through the study of dialectic, to
comprehend the Idea of the Good.

In the last part of Book VII Socrates describes in more detail the practical
application of his curriculum. After the standard education in music and
gymnastic the selected student passes on to the abstract subjects and thence to
dialectic, with frequent tests on the way.  The few who reach the summit, at
about the age of fifty - and Socrates reminds his hearers that they may be men
or women - divide the rest of their lives between philosophy and the affairs of
state.

Finally, Socrates repeats that his proposals will only be realized by a
philosopher-king, an unlikely combination perhaps, but not an impossible one.


BOOK VIII:

The perfect city and kingly or aristocratic character having now been fully


                                      -4-





described, Socrates reverts to the point reached at the end of Book IV, and
proceeds to deal with the four degenerate forms of constitution and the four
corresponding types of individual.

The aristocratic constitution degenerates into the timocratic (or honour-
loving) when the warrior class prevails over the wisdom-loving class, and
imposes a militant policy dictated by ambition and the love of glory.
Similarly, in the soul of the timocratic man the spirited part gains precedence
over the reasoning part, and the result is a valiant but contentious and
ambitious nature.

The timocratic constitution degenerates into oligarchy (the rule of the few)
when honour-loving turns to money-grubbing.  The city is divided into rich
rulers and poor subjects.  In the soul of the oligarchic man, pleasure-loving
but ungenerous, the desiring part prevails over the reasoning and spirited
parts.

The oligarchic constitution degenerates into democracy (the rule of the people)
when the poor in the oligarchic state revolt.  All are then set free to do as
they wish - and, says Socrates in effect, to go to the devil in their own way.
Where the oligarchic man, thrifty at heart, gave way only to the moneymaking
(or necessary) desires, the democratic man, casting off even this restraint,
gives free rein to the spendthrift (or unnecessary) desires, and liberty is
thus complete.

The democratic constitution degenerates into tyranny when men tire at last of
the lawlessness of a liberty which has become license. They appoint a strong
man to restore order;  he raises a bodyguard or private army to suppress the
irresponsible elements in society;  and, unperceived, tyranny is established in
the city.


BOOK IX:

The tyrannic man, continues Socrates, is ruled by the worst class of the
unnecessary desires.  To the lawlessness of the democratic man he adds the
frenzy of lust;  utterly without scruple, he is driven to boundless excess by
passions he can never sate.  The tyrannic man, like the tyrannic state, is
slave to fear, want, every sort of misery and every sort of wickedness:  he is
last in happiness, below the kingly man, the oligarchic man and the democratic
man in descending order.

This is Socrates' first answer to Thrasymachos' argument in Book I, that
injustice is more profitable than justice.  He continues with another. The
three elements in the soul distinguished in Bok IV lead the three classes of
men in which they respectively rule in pursuit of wisdom, honour and pleasure.
Each class will maintain its own aim to be the highest, but clearly the best
opinion will be that of the wisdom-loving or philosophical man, because he will
be the most experienced and the best equipped to judge.  We must agree with him
that wisdom-loving is superior to honour-loving and honour-loving to
pleasure-loving.

Yet a third argument follows.  Socrates analyzes the kinds of pleasure enjoyed
by the three classes:  the philosopher's pleasure in wisdom is best because it
partakes most of the unchanging world of truth and real being;  the pleasures
of victory and honour come next;  and last of all is the pleasure of gratified
desire, which is no more than a fleeting shadow of true pleasure.



                                      -5-





Finally Socrates deals with the question raised by Glaucon and Adeimantos in
Book II, whether justice is valuable for its own sake. The three elements in
the soul are likened to a man, a lion and a monster:  in the soul of the just
the man rules, in the soul of the unjust the monster rules.  Clearly the first
condition is intrinsically of more value than the second, and a spurious
appearance of justice cannot make injustice any more praiseworthy.

Socrates ends Book IX by saying that whether or not the perfect city exists on
earth, it is laid up in heaven as a pattern for mankind.


BOOK X:

Socrates now returns to his criticism of the artist.  He distinguishes three
levels of reality, instancing the ideal bed, the bed you sleep on, and the
image of a bed in a picture.  The artist functions at the lowest level;  he
only portrays the actual, not the ideal bed:  art is mere imitation of an
appearance of reality. Now, imitation is essentially an activity inferior to
doing or making;  and moreover the artist will never even be able to imitate
particularly well, because his knowledge of his subject is bound in every case
to be inferior to a practical knowledge of it.  However diverting, art cannot
be a serious occupation.

Nevertheless, art does appeal to some element in the soul - not, says Socrates,
the rational element, but the irrational.  In literature, for example, the poet
will not imitate the reasonable man but the foolish and unstable man, because
the latter will, he thinks, give more scope for effect, and will also be a more
congenial subject for the foolish and unstable part of the soul.  The tendency
of art to corrupt even the best of natures, by thus encouraging the lower
element at the expense of the higher, is all the more dangerous because of
art's undoubted fascination;  and the soul in pursuit of virtue must be
ceaselessly on guard against it.

The last section of Book X follows the fortunes of the just and the unjust to
the after life.  Everything, says Socrates, has its own evil, tending to
corrupt and destroy, and its own good, tending to preserve.  The soul is
corrupted by its evil vice, but is not destroyed by vice;  it is hardly likely,
therefore, to be destroyed by the evil of the body, disease.  In fact disease
and death do not affect the soul at all - obviously they perish with the body;
in the after life, as on earth, it fares according to its deserts, the just
soul being eternally rewarded and the unjust soul eternally punished.  With the
fable of Er, in which these conclusions of the argument are given mystical
form, the Republic ends.

















                                      -6-



SQL 1 line 31> 
SQL 1 line 32> select x from test where y like '~power ~struggle';
     x      
------------+
alien
declare
events
kids
liberty
qadhafi

SQL 1 line 33> create metamorph index ix_mm on test (y) ;

SQL 1 line 34> select x from test where y like '~power ~struggle';
     x      
------------+
alien
declare
events
kids
liberty
qadhafi

SQL 1 line 35> 
SQL 1 line 36> drop table test;

SQL 1 line 37> 
SQL 1 line 38> 
